---
title: "About Everything"
permalink: /about/
layout: post
---

> "Only great pain, the long, slow pain that takes its time... compels us to descend to our ultimate depths... I doubt that such pain makes us "better"; but I know it makes us more profound... In the end, lest what is most important remain unsaid: from such abysses, from such severe sickness, one returns newborn, having shed one's skin... with merrier senses, with a second dangerous innocence in joy, more childlike and yet a hundred times subtler than one has ever been before."
>
> — Friedrich Nietzsche, *The Gay Science*

> "The pleasures arising from thinking and learning will make us think and learn all the more."
> ― Aristotle, *The Nicomachean Ethics*

# About The Channel

I am an amateur philosopher with [post-concussion syndrome](https://www.cognitivefxusa.com/blog/post-concussion-syndrome-and-post-concussion-symptoms-pcs). I can barely read or write for any extended period of time now, but the desire to exist philosophically compels me to do something. In the end, I have found a compromise with my disability in this channel: unscripted but usually premeditated audio "lectures" concerning ideas I have spent the last few years wrestling with. The primary purpose of this channel is to produce encapsulated discourses on my ideas which I can reference later when I hopefully recover, and which I can send to my friends who are also interested in philosophy to start discussions with them. The primary purpose of this channel is therefore *not* to spread my views, especially since while I try to defend my views as rigorously as possible in my videos, because of the limitations of unscripted videos and my inability to do real research, I cannot defend my views in as much depth as I would like.

# About the Blog

This is a blog that is connected to, and has consistent branding with, my YouTube channel, for the sake of convenience. I plan to put any philosophical writing I do in spite of PCS here so people can easily find it. I will probably be doing such writing in short doeses at irregular intervals; in fact, I'll be doing it in short enough doeses that I'll probably have to return to edit and revise articles I've written over the course of months. As such this isn't strictly a "blog" so much as a place to keep my constantly improving philosophical writing.

# About My Philosophy

## Metaphysics

1. Consciousness is incoherent without the world. Subjects require subjectivity, and subjectivity requires an object. The object of that subjectivity cannot ultimately be the subject itself, because the subject needs to exist first for it to be there to be aware of. So to bootstrap consciousness there must be something outside of it which it is capable of interfacing with. That is "the world."
2. The world is what it is and does not owe us an explanation; whatever explanation we wring out of it is a victory for mind and sanity, a privilege not to be expected but to be celebrated.
3. Now there are other beings that present to us in this world that act similarly to how we do, in reacting to things as if they have internal experiences, in saying things to us that communicate meaningful ideas to us just as we can communicate meaningful ideas to others based on our internal thoughts, and that plan using means and ends as we do with conscious thought. Now it is possible that these other beings are simply p-zombies. However, first, that would be positing two kinds of creatures (one that acts conscious but isn't, and one that is) where one kind would do; second, all of those appearances indicate, based on how we know our own appearances are linked to our own consciousness, that these beings are also conscious, so to assume otherwise is to contradict the only evidence we have concerning them; and third, we have to interact with them as if they were conscious anyway because they appear in all respects to be, so the most parsimonious and effective theory is that they are. Thus, it appears that there are other beings in this world that are conscious too.
4. Now the fact that I can interface with other beings in this world indicates that they are connected to the same world I am; otherwise I would not be able to interface with them. Likewise, they act as if they are generally aware of the same things I am in the world, when I point them out. In both these counts, then, it seems that this external world has intersubjective (or objective) existence.
5. Things which I can demonstrate to these other consciousnesses are much more likely to be located in the world that is common to us than to be, by happenstance, present merely in our own minds simultaneously, while things which I cannot demonstrate but which only appear to me could more easily be something that is just a figment of my mind. Therefore demonstrable things are more likely to be part of intersubjective reality than those which are not demonstrable.
6. That which is real is that which directly or indirectly effects our senses and which is intersubjective in nature. If it did not effect our senses it might exist, but it would not be part of any reality that matters to us, nor any necessary component of the world that generates our consciousness in the first place. Therefore it is not part of "our" reality. If it was not intersubjective, then it exists only in our minds and not in the common consciousness generator that I share with the other conscious beings around me. An indication of intersubjectivity, if not a proof of it, is demonstrableness.
7. This external world has to be something in particular to have a particular effect, such as being sensible by subjective agents, so it is probable at least that the world follows the law of identity. If that is the case, than everything that is real has a certain thing which it is, and an infinite number of things that it is not. That which it is dictates how it interacts and acts, and can be called its nature.
8. Now (see the section on epistemology) the best explanation for how everything seems to appear to us in the world, as communicated to us by our senses, is that everything is material: if it is real, it has location and/or extension in space-time, and adheres to a certain law as set by its nature (natural laws). Objects are epiphenomena of the natural laws of elementary particles, but are real because they act as coherent and discrete things with their own natural laws which are themselves epiphenomena of the laws of elementary particles and their particular arrangements, but which seem different through emergent properties. 
9. Abstract concepts describe the common epiphenomena of many specific epiphenomena: mathematics describes the epiphenomena of discrete material objects. The laws that it describes are the result of how these things act, their natures, but these laws are causally contingent on these objects, not the causes *of* how these objects act. These abstract concepts are not themselves "real" because they are not used to refer to specific objects that impact our senses, but instead to the common behaviors and properties of many objects, and as such do not directly or indirectly impact our senses except *through* the particular objects that we call real.

## Epistemology

1. We are thrown into the world with no choice but to deal with it on its own terms. The only reason we care about it is because it effects us through our senses, and because we can effect it only by its own rules; we should therefore learn about its rules using our senses.
2. To believe anything before there is sufficient reason asks us to believe everything, even the contradictions. Hence we should not believe our senses are unreliable *or* reliable without reason. But the only way to get information about the thing our senses tell us about is *through* our senses, so the only reason we could have for doubting a *particular* sense experience is if we already trusted *other* sense experiences that contradicted it. Likewise the only reason we could have for doubting sense experience in general is because we frequently have sense experiences that we trust more that show that the previous sense experiences were not trustworthy (basically, induction on the previous statement). So either we believe that sense experience is unreliable for no reason (and then we might as well believe they are reliable for the same) or we believe that some senses are reliable and some aren't, in which case, the decision becomes based on the majority of sense experience because the majority is what we care about the most, since senses correspond directly to some quantity of "care."
3. The only way we can act is if we have something on the basis of which to guess what the outcome of that action will be, and we have no better source of information about the world in the future than what it was like in the past. Although the future might be different than the past, until we have reason to think so and information about what the change is, the null hypothesis should be the assumption that it will stay the same or similar, since we have no other source of information anyway and we cannot just act on no information at all or remain paralyzed. Furthermore, this strategy of loose induction is inherently self-correcting, as if we are wrong and something has changed, we will find out and change our beliefs. Thus, we should base our understanding and reconciliation of appearances on choosing a theory that best predicts all past facts using as few assumptions as possible, and operate on the basis of this theory *prima facie*.
4. Now, although the best way of arriving at knowledge about the world is through collating sensual evidence, that is not the only way of arriving at knowledge in general. For instance, the statements above are knowledge about epistemology, yet cannot be justified using our senses themselves because they're not statements about things that senses indicate. Instead, knowledge about philosophy, the internal workings of our own minds, and these things is based on presuppositions that we all always already and inescapably believe, since they are necessary to assume to even question them (performatively basic). Any system of epistemology must ultimately rely on such presuppositions, because if you had to justify every proposition that went into justifying a further proposition, there would be an infinite regress. Instead, there are some propositions that are not justified directly in the same line of reasoning, but are meta-justified by their incapability. Our best option is to explicitly document the presuppositions that are actually inescapable, try to limit the list to the minimal amount, and make sure we don't unconsciously either go farther than they can take us, or add new unnecessary and not peformatively basic ones. This minimal list is:
   1. That I exist and am conscious, because I have to assume that, or notice that, whenever I do any thinking. Implies:
      1. That something external to me exists that generates this subjectivity.
   2. That the basic laws of thought hold because without them meaningful thought is impossible, yet I have meaningful thoughts, and in fact must have them in order to even question these laws. Additionally, to negate these laws implies them (at least in the case of the law of non-contradiction, which itself implies the law of identity).
   3. That my memory is *prima facie* reliable: Otherwise thought is impossible because anything I *just* thought could actually be untrustworthy, and I'd have to spend all of my time second-guessing the second-guessing of my thoughts in an infinite regress.

## Ethics
1. I ask you, why would we mourn a lack of meaning? Why would we want a universe that gives us objective purpose and meaning? Whatever purpose or meaning it could give would be just as cold, heartless, and uncaring as a universe without meaning anyway, because that is the nature of objectivity. At least this way, we can set our own course.
2. Life has no inherent meaning outside of its natural desire to continue and flourish. All life has this desire, because that which does not have this desire — or does not at least desire this desire, which reduces to the same — has or will shortly cease to exist, and certainly does not seek philosophy. Meaning can be constructed out of this by finding what we are best suited to become and finding things to test ourselves against to grow and goals to pursue. "We must imagine Sisyphus happy."
3. My ethics is objective in the same way a doctor's advice for a patient is objective: it applies to them whether they think it does or not, and applies in virtue of both objective facts about them, the external world and, most importantly, their inherent desires. It is not absolute, just as a doctor's advice can include conditions that change based on context, and neither is it universal, just as a doctor cannot give the same medical advice to everyone. Yet, most human beings share certain desires and values, and limitations on how to achieve them, so I can provide advice for most people. These desires are:
   1. **Self-actualization**: the desire to fulfill their capacities as human beings and as individual human beings. Now the core categories of capacities for human beings are:
      1. **Rationality**: the ability to think consistently and abstract, as well as the capacity to be objective or impartial (to some degree). This has implications for how we act towards others, as to be most rational we should not act in ways that we would view as wrong or unacceptable for others. It also means that we are happiest when we are free to choose our course in life so we can use our minds to decide for ourselves how to live.
      2. **Creativity**: the ability to create things for the support of oneself and others by using our reason to manipulate the environment through the rules we learn about it. Those who live a life of parasitism and rely on others to maintain them, as well as those who produce nothing useful or original, cannot fulfill this capacity.
      3. **Sociability**: the ability to interact with others through using language, reason, and common values and goals instead of through animistic means such as tribalism and fear. Those who live by the sword may not die by the sword, but they'll live without fulfilling this capacity to the fullest.
   2. **Satisfaction of basic needs**: this we share with animals and is not uniquely human, yet it is just as important. There are two major categories of basic needs:
      1. **Empathy**: the desire to not see others suffer, and to form bonds with others that are reciprocated. The natural desire to reciprocate and give benevolently in general. This means we should want to live in a generally happy society, because living in a society drenched in suffering, even if you are not suffering, is not ideal.
      2. **Material wellbeing**: the maintenance of our physical existence that enables all else to follow, for without that maintenance we wouldn't survive long enough to self-actualize at all. This guides us to look out first and foremost for our own material wellbeing, and then once that is at least minimally secure, then we can move on to higher goals. It also means we should want to live in a society that is as materially wealthy as possible on average, to maximize our chances.
4. As for those who do not share these desires and values innately (the psychopaths and extreme depressives and mentally ill), I cannot help you, but I do not think anyone can anyway, so I say this: as long as you do not hinder the pursuit of valued and desired flourishing on the part of us, the rest of humanity, we will not and need not bother you. But if you hinder us and hurt us, we have no reason not to defend ourselves from you and take our retribution too, because the only thing that can motivate us to do or not do anything is our desires and values, so if you violate those, and we must ask to rescue them, then there is no reason stopping us from doing so.

## Politics

1. We must begin absolutely free because there is nothing inherent about the metaphysical nature of reality that implies a duty to obey authority. Duty can only arise from the practical way to achieve a desire; therefore authority can only gain a right to expect compliance from people if it is based on practical utility for those it claims authority over, as something that helps them achieve their desires. Thus no one must obey authority unless they know that it helps them achieve their flourishing. Authority can only morally rest on the consent of the individuals it claims authority over.
2. We must begin absolutely free because if the default position was unfreedom, and a reason must be demonstrated for freedom instead of the other way around, then we would begin in a condition where nothing, not even the giving of that reason or action upon it, would be allowed, and that is clearly untenable.
3. We must being with an assumption of individual freedom because only individuals are best suited to find out and act on what their own flourishing is.
4. Politics besides this is merely the reconciliation of two problems: what people can do while maintaining their flourishing and the flourishing of others, and what, within those bounds, optimizes overall flourishing. An order that requires, for instance, the rejection of individuality and choice, theft, murder, servility, parasitism, or anything else like that is one that requires of those who maintain it something that is unethical for them, whether or not it would maximize flourishing overall, and therefore cannot be permitted.
5. Therefore, my ethical system requires a political order where:
   1. Any authority requires the explicit and knowing consent of those under it, consent which can be revoked at any time.
   2. Absolute individual freedom is the default and any restrictions on it must be justified sufficiently with reference to the flourishing of those whose freedom is being restricted if it wants to claim a moral duty on their part to adhere to the restriction.
   3. Absolute individual freedom is the default and any restrictions on it must be justified sufficiently with reference to the flourishing of those who would carry out enforcing the restriction, to ensure that it is morally permissible for them to actually enforce the restriction.
   4. Where there are not different moral standards for human beings within this political system. This means that those who enforce the restrictions on freedom have the same duties based in their flourishing that everyone else who falls within my moral system does, so that if my system forbids murder, theft, and kidnapping, it forbids it not just to the average citizens, but to those enforcing the rules as well.
6. This political order, of course, is going to be a form of individualist anarchism. Specifically, the details of my moral order imply a sort of market anarchism or voluntaryism with property rights that are somewhere in-between Neo Lockean and usufruct.
