---
published: true
title: Debates— What're They Good For?
tags: ["meta-philosophy"]
---
Hello everyone and today you guys are going to be in for another irregularly posted angry rant about something random on this blog. I have a pretty terrible headache today, and I'm just bored as fuck and I've been thinking about this subject for quite a while so here it goes.

I really don't think debates are a good way to go about doing things. My main issue with debates is the time limit: it prevents a detailed and nuanced exploration of the subject, as 1 to 3 hours is simply not enough time to actually go in depth on any philosophical or scientific topic, and worse, it actually changes the nature of the dialogue from being about which side has the best arguments or the most professional and academic literature on its side, to which side has the most adept orators and who has the most responses memorized off the cuff. Because the thing is, if you have a limited amount of time to respond to something someone has said, it becomes extremely easy for them to gish gallop, or simply be so wrong that it would take way too long to unpack the way in which they're wrong. Furthermore, if you have a limited amount of time, it can be difficult to fully explain or even formulate a response to something someone has said if one doesn't have an off-the-cuff response memorized already, which is difficult to do for actually correct arguments. Additionally, it can happen, because you don't have time to do research in order to respond to what someone has said, that one can simply happen to not be familiar with the necessary part of the literature in order to be able to respond to someone has said, even if what they have said is manifestly wrong and demonstrally so if you were familiar with the literature. And so what ends up happening is a debate does not actually demonstrate which side has the best arguments, which side is correct, which side has all the professional or academic literature on it side, or any of these other useful things to demonstrate. Instead, it demonstrates which side has the best pre-memorized responses and which side has the smoothest and sharpest orators. This is why I think debates are probably best for some form of entertainment, but not much else. Debates don't indicate which side is actually more likely to be correct, or even which orator really knows more or is smarter or is more correct, instead they just indicate who is quickest on their feet and who have something memorized. This is especially true since oftentimes in a debate, even an incorrect answer, if said smoothly glibly and confidently enough, can sound like enough of a response or rebuttal, and it's often quite easy to memorize simple but wrong answers. Indeed, I think it is a general truth in philosophy that a good accurate and nuanced argument is going to be far longer than a wrong argument. There are long wrong arguments, but there are almost no short right arguments.

Additionally, the thing about debates is that the idea is not to change the other person's mind or to arrive at a more nuanced understanding of the problem, the point of the debate to win. And generally, as I alluded to above, it is enough to be considered to have one to have a simple, understandable, and preferably funny retort or rebuttal to a comment someone has made. It needs to have perhaps the appearance of rightness, or something analogous to writing anyway, but it does not need to actually be right. Therefore, combining this with the time limit that prevents someone from making an in-depth critique of a statement that is so wrong it verges on nonsense but sounds reasonable and would take a very long time to unpack, I generally happens that in debates, those who have a large amount of rote and trite answers, generally incorrect ones, and who are able to spout them with enough confidence, are generally viewed to be correct by those who already agree with them and also those who are undecided, and only those who already vehemently disagree with them will be able to realize that they remain wrong. And since the point of the debate is to win, this doesn't seem problematic to those who have participated in, or listened to, the debate. Meanwhile, if the point of the debate was explicitly to change the other person's mind, or to deepen and enrich the ideas in both people's minds, then it would become clear that the trite and scathing answer, that is delivered with a plum and clearly pre-memorized, is not what is desired, and would be quickly thrown out even if it has the appearance of correctness, because it is far too trite. However, this is unfortunately not the case, as debates have become a forearm for middle brow people to enjoy feeling smart.

Don't get me wrong. I don't particularly have anything against debates in the sense that I don't think they should be stopped. The beach are still useful in a few ways beyond just as entertainment. For one thing, debates can introduce you to people who might have more in-depth and nuanced and interesting works for you to explore on your own time; this is especially useful since the debate will introduce you to thinkers of opposing views, such that if you want to go deeper into the subject, you'll then be aware of people of differing views who have deeper works on the subject, instead of simply sticking with the intellectual tradition that you were already familiar with or leaning towards. Additionally, debates can serve as surface level introductions to a topic in order to peak your interest in further investigation, although the danger with this is that if one side appears to have soundly one the debate, you can go away thinking you don't need to look any further, or thinking that you will only need to investigate the side that one, which due to the non-truthy nature of debates, might be a serious mistake.

What do I propose instead of live debates? This is a difficult question, as debates seem to have been the accepted form of public discourse for a very very long time. However, I think there is something to be said for the old tradition of writing letters back and forth in response to people, as people used to do responding to each other in newspapers and such. Of course, nowadays it seems too much to ask to ask people to read extended debates in text, so the closest approximation for today's world would probably be YouTube response videos: people can trade back and forth videos that are completely under their control and that they have enough time to research and study and formulate their arguments for, therefore leading to something that is a debate in that it's multi-sided and people are arguing with each other and expressing different views, but it is more likely to reflect accurately the truth of the matter and the consensus of wherever scholars study the matter under debate.