---
title: The Paradox of Intolerance Resolved
tags: ["lgbtq", "politics", "ethics"]
---

One of the common refrains you will here from the conservative/anti-SJW/'politically incorrect' sphere is that progressives are just as intolerant as they are, just of different things. While conservatives are intolerant of other lifestyles, other races, LGBTQ+ people, immigrants, and so on, progressives are just as intolerant of bigots, racists, sexists, and authoritarians. They are equally intolerant, just of different things. There's something crucially wrong with this statement, however, and in this post I want to briefly analyze what it is.

Basically, when conservatives point out that progressives, who are all about tolerance, are *also* intolerant of certain things, they are pointing at what Karl Popper called 'the paradox of tolerance'. Basically, the core problem is that if we want a society where people are free to live their lives in peace, without the censure, constant criticism, and discrimination or bigotry of others, we must actually censure, criticize, and discriminate against those who do not want such a society. If we want to be free of Christians preaching that all those who live in ways that are different from the narrow, unhealthy, prudish norms that they adhere to will burn in a lake of eternal fire, we must be willing to raise our voices against them. In the eyes of conservatives, all they are doing when they are preaching against homosexuality or whatever the big scare of the day is, is criticizing things they don't like, so when progressives criticize them for doing it, it looks like progressives are being hypocrites.

The core fallacy here is that of being over-specific: looking at only the specific actions that progressives take, and not why they take them and the context within which they occur. One way I like to explain this, and why the paradox of tolerance is not a paradox, is by comparison to something like the Non-Aggression Principle: only use violence against those who initiate it first. 

If you only use violence against people who used violence on innocent people, then you are not the same as the person that uses violence against innocent people. In fact, you are explicitly set against that: if everyone would stop using violence against innocent people, you would stop using violence as well, so in a world where everyone follows the rule that you do, there will be no violence against innocents, meaning your rule HAS to be against such violence. The key difference is that on the one hand you have a person that will use violence for whatever reason, unqualified, and on the other hand, you have someone who will only use violence in response to the  first kind of person. Those are clearly two different kinds of people, and they are not on the same level whatsoever. This is basically what self-defense is, after all.

Applying this logic to tolerance and intolerance,  there is a crucial difference between people who will be intolerant of people who aren't hurting anyone and haven't done anything to them, and people who will only be intolerant of the first kind of person, only intolerant in response to unprovoked intolerance.  These are clearly two different kinds of people, because on the one hand you'll have someone who will be intolerant of people for purely personal and arbitrary reasons, on the basis of what they merely find, gross or unusual or unfamiliar, and on the other hand you will have people that are intolerant for the purpose of protecting others and so on.

You see, there is a difference between provoked intolerance, and simple bigoted intolerance. This is pretty clear from the fact that no one bats an eye when we are intolerant towards murderers, rapists, etc. Why? Because they hurt someone, they did something to deserve intolerance in response. That, to a lesser degree because it is usually nonviolent, is what intolerant people have done: they have done something to others that has justly provoked the resentment of the rest of society.

It is intolerant, technically, to not want to hang out with an asshole. But it's not the kind of intolerance people are talking about when they're talking about being "against intolerance."