---
published: true
title: Rescuing Masculinity?
---
## Introduction
I've been working on a political manifesto, finishing the essay on egoistic equilibrium social norms, and working on an ongoing fantasy story with my girlfriend, so I haven't been able to post here a lot recently. However, there's an interesting post I made in response to something I saw online that fits here. I saw a comment on a video where a guy was saying that he recognized a lot of the traditional masculine ideal is toxic, but the idea that a lot of queer people put forward that masculinity is fundamentally broken and unsalvageable doesn't sit right with him, and he was wondering what was salvageable about it. Here's what I wrote in response:

## On Modern Masculinity

I'm a 19-year-old male as well, and I personally think that I've found a good balance with my masculinity. I've never really thought of myself as a man predominantly, and it's not really a load-bearing pillar of my identity in the way that it seems to be for you — the load bearing pillar of my identity is being a philosopher :) — but nevertheless I think I can provide some help. I should preface this by saying that I'm in a bisexual polyamorous relationship with a pansexual girl and a trans man, so I'm not exactly straight, but I still think I can answer this, especially since this demonstrates that I'm an ally while also being a man. Additionally both of my partners come from past abusive relationships, both with their family and previous partners, and they gravitated to me specifically, in their own words, because I'm the opposite of that. I'm supportive and I'm willing to accommodate, and that's what they love about me. So as far as I can tell at least, I'm a good person, although that's hard to say from my own perspective obviously. At least I'm trying and I seem to be succeeding.

The most important component of masculinity as far as I can tell is a fundamental sort of stability. The idea isn't to be stoic or hard or atomized from everyone around you; although these things are similar in some respects to what you should actually be aiming for, I think they are mistaken approximations of what you should be. What you should be aiming for is to be like a flexible tree, so that when the wind blows you can bend and roll with it: acknowledge when you're sad or unhappy or whatever, but then spring back up eventually. That's unlike men who are stoic and repress their emotions, or men who are hard and aggressive, or men who just seal themselves off from anyone else to prevent any pain or weakness from showing; those men are men who are like a rigid oak tree that'll just crack in a storm — and start to abuse the people around them in the worst cases.

Both of my partners really appreciate me because I'm actually there for them emotionally while being a very calm and rational person. You can be more open to emotions then the traditional picture of masculinity that's so toxic, without also becoming weak and "feminine." So I can listen to their problems — really hear them — give clarifying responses that makes them feel like they've been heard by mirroring back to them what they said, and then (if they feel ready) give advice, and the whole time I can be calm and stable for them. But then I can also express my own problems to them and open up to them, because that's an important part of having a relationship: relationships are two way. They are a trade.

So I can weather the storm of my own problems by showing them that I'm going through stuff, bending and acknowledging things, but I can remain stable throughout it, at a bedrock level, and be ready to recover when it's over. And I can weather the storm of their problems as well and pop back up to help them out.

I think that's sort of the most important part of being a man, at least as I see it and as I try to embody it in my life and in the relationships that I have. It's about being a steady fixed point for the people that you care about, not in the sense that you never move or budge or bend, not in the sense that you never show weakness, but in the sense that if you do show weakness you always get back up in the end.

What's important about this as well is that this is a partially other-focused conception of masculinity. There's an internal part to it, in that you need to be resilient and willing to get back up on your own if there isn't anyone to help you, while accepting help if there is someone to help you, but there's also the relationship aspect of being the person that helps those around you get back up because you have the strength to be the one that gets up first and helps the other ones up after you **if you need to**.

## A Note on Gender

It's unclear to my why this way of living has to be gendered, however. I don't see why you need separate roles to something that really could be adopted by anyone, nor why those roles have to be associated with biological sex on average or anything of the sort. I'm actually of the general opinion that gender really shouldn't exist, and everyone should just adopt whatever role, way of living, or aesthetic they want and just exist as that, and you can be attracted to whoever's aesthetic and way of being interests you. But that's just my crazy anarchist side-rant lol.
