---
title: "Anarchistic Relations: An Exploration"
---

In order to truly understand the values of anarchism, it is necessary to understand what anarchistic relations between individuals mean. That is, to understand the types of interactions between people which are desirable and undesirable from the standpoint of an anarchist. [In giving up anarcho-capitalism](https://tbdp-web.github.io/blog/2021/12/09/not-ancap.html), I divested myself of an overly-rigid system for distinguishing between those two types of interactions, which did not accurately map to what was actually valuable to me, but in the process of searching for accuracy and truth, I sacrificed some clarity. To some degree, that is inevitable: every principle, when not made a phantom to possess the mind, admits of an exception; nevertheless, I think attempting to reestablish some clarity by describing the difference between the kinds of relations that anarchists value, and the kinds they don't, is a worthwhile endeavor. While, under most circumstances, the difference is intuitive, and the important cases are already paradigmatic, in arguing for them, it is helpful to have a set of underlying principles instead of just simple intuitions.

Please keep in mind that this is a tentative first approximation of the principles I am attempting to elucidate. Many of the points found herein come from a conversation I had on an anarchist Discord server, and so are not strictly my own.

## 1

To begin with, we should consider the negative case. What do anarchists *not* want to see? After all, anarchism defines itself primarily by what it is against: it is against *ἀρχός*, or rulers. It is against authority, hierarchy, and  subordination, all the forms and ways in which people can be said to rule over others. This is because it recognizes the fundamental impossibility of legitimate authority: no philosophical argument has yet been found to justify the sacrifice of one's own interests for an idea or for another.[^ar1] This is also, for me, because I recognize the central importance of liberty or autonomy to living my life as a fulfilled person capable of achieving my desires, and I see a society with greater autonomy for all as both a safeguard of my autonomy, and a society that I would prefer to live in overall.

[^ar1]: Nor do I think such an argument can ever be found, because [I am a moral non-cognitivist](https://tbdp-web.github.io/blog/2021/12/08/egoism.html) (a combination of emotivism and prescriptivism).

Thus, an anarchist does not want to see any relation between people where one person's interests are placed above another (subordination), where one person is controlled by another (hierarchy), or where those two previous relations are reified and sanctified by a unifying social organizational principle, that is accepted by third parties to that interaction which pressure the subordinate person into that subordination (authority).

Subordination can happen in many ways.

First, it can result from threats of violence, which force one side to set aside their interests and only serve the interests of the party using the violence. This violence that leads to subordination is distinct from *retaliatory* violence, which is used to ensure that a party's interests are represented at all, which is used *in contravention of* the first type of violence, meant to institute subordination.

Second, subordination and hierarchy can be generated on the basis of imbalanced bargaining power. The best way to understand this is through what I call the transitive property of autonomy: if the choices one has available don't preserve autonomy, then the autonomy you have to make the choice is also very low. For instance, if my choices are between working for someone and starving to death, that is, in a very important sense, not much of a choice at all, because I am choosing between death (a state with basically no autonomy) and this other option. I have no real autonomy in my choice to pick a master and serve them. When someone basically has no choice but to accept whatever someone else gives them, that person can essentially lay down an ultimatum, considering only their own interests in the process and throwing the other person a scrap here or there. This is why preventing someone from drinking at an oasis in a desert unless they pay you is reprehensible: that person has no real choice but to give you whatever you ask.

When subordination is based on bargaining power, of course, it becomes a non-binary thing: one can make an agreement with someone else with greater or lesser choice in the matter, better or worse, fewer or more numerous alternative options. Therefore, such choices can lead to greater or lesser representation of the subordinate party's interests, as the imbalance in bargaining power changes. This means that an anarchist must choose at what point on this sliding scale of subordination an interaction becomes illegitimate. This must be done on a case-by-case basis, of course, but there are two rules of thumb I generally apply. If this subordination is being used to deprive the subordinate party of things that are crucial to their current and ongoing autonomy (because not all components of autonomy are equally important), such as the things they need to produce, their time, their dignity, food, shelter, etc, then it is likely that subordination has gone much too far. Likewise, if the imposition on the subordinate person's autonomy is greater than the imposition on the other person's autonomy it would represent to simply free the subordinate person, that is another indication that subordination has gone much too far.

Subordination can be parlayed into hierarchy by simply extending the time frontier. While subordination occurs in a particular instance of an interaction, hierarchy is when one person is systematically and ongoingly required to make their own interests of secondary importance to themselves in order to serve someone else. Hierarchy also tends to most often be accompanied by authority. Authority is the air of 'legitimacy' that allows hierarchy and subordination to go on, by presenting ideological reasons why those under its rule should submit, and those who could do something about it should not. Authority is the just-so stories that the slave-masters tell, in order to convince people that there is no other option, that they are right to do what they do.

## 3

Now that we have defined what it is that anarchists are against, it is time to attempt an examination of what we are *for*. The inverse of subordination, of course, is reciprocity: an interaction between individuals which is fundamentally anarchistic is one in which the interests of all sides are represented, and treated as equally important. Each side asserts their own interests, but recognizes that compromise must be arrived at with the others in order to ensure peace, cooperation, and avoid conflict. Such interactions are mutually beneficial and, generally, equally beneficial, because there is an equality to all sides: my interests are no more inherently meaningful or important than yours, except as they interest me more. Since the full extent of the interests of each individual is generally incompatible with the others (since, for instance, it might be in my interest to be able to take from you whatever I want, but of course that is not in your interest, and vice versa), each individual must give a little, must compromise, in order to ensure or encourage the compromise of the others. In the absence of such cooperation, some may have gained and others lost from the exchange, as some were stronger and more able to assert their absolute will, but with compromise all have gained, and in some cases, all have gained more than if it had been a war of all against all.

This is the sort of positive reciprocity I discussed in 'Two Principles of Anarchism,' an interaction where the interests of others are respected equally, and represented, in each decision. This preserves autonomy because it ensures that each individual is moving toward their own plan for life, and gets to preserve the things that are most important to them in the process. It preserves choice, independence, and freedom. It is an interaction that all have an interest in taking part in, because all get benefits from it, instead of an interaction that, at least for one party, must be motivated by fear or indoctrination.



