---
published: true
title: The Principle of Phenomenological Conservatism
---
My response (in a YouTube comment) to a criticism of G.E. Moore in a podcast which I thought was silly.

I haven't read GE Moore's papers on this subject as of yet, but I've researched this argument, especially in the context of the rest of his beliefs, and I think you're doing him a major disservice, seemingly (although I obviously can't know for certain) stemming from a general attitude of anti-intellectualism.

The important part you're missing here is that the principle of phenomenological conservatism is a key component of GE Moore's philosophical project, and supplies the criteria for argument justification that he is using to determine whether his "proof" of the external world is successful. Without knowledge of this principle, of what makes arguments in his estimation successful, of course his argument seems rediculous.

The principle of phenomenological conservatism is the idea that unless we are given sufficient positive reasons otherwise, we should trust phenomena or appearances as they present themselves to us.

There are two primary reasons that are generally given for this principle: The first one is that the only possible reason that we could ever have for doubting or rejecting an appearance is on the basis of other appearances, either appearances to our senses if the appearance we are trying to reject is one of the senses, or the appearances of our intellect if what we are trying to reject is an appearance of the intellect. Thus we must ultimately come down to trusting some appearances in order to reject any other appearances, thus rejecting all appearances gives us no reason to reject appearances in the first place and undercuts itself. Basically, if we reject all appearances then we have no reason not to trust appearances, and if we are to have a reason to reject any appearances, it must be on the basis of more, other, appearances.

The second argument that is most commonly given for this principle is that the conclusion of an argument can be no more certain than the conjunction of all of the premises being true at once. Thus the conclusion of an argument is always less certain individually than any of the premises in the argument. So if our distrust in our senses is constructed from a set of premises that include sensory premises, then our trust in the conclusion that we should distrust our senses is always going to be less than the trust that we have in at least some of our sense experiences to begin with. It may not be less than our trust in all of our sense experiences, because we do not have to use all of our sense experiences to convince ourselves not to trust some of them, but it does mean that it will be less certain than some of the sensory experiences that we have.

To give an example of what these two arguments are talking about, consider the fact that when you put a stick into a stream, the stick appears bent because of the refraction that the water produces. The reason that we know not to trust that appearance, is because of other appearances: when we pull the stick out of the water, it appears straight again, and before we put the stick in the water it appeared straight, and if we touch the stick while it is in the water, we will feel that it is straight. In the absence of those other appearances, we would have no reason not to trust the appearance of the stick being bent and therefore considered the stick bent. Likewise for our senses in general, we only individually have a reason to distrust a particular sense appearance because other sense appearances contradict it in such a way that they outweigh it, and we only have a reason to distrust our sense experiences in general because we trust other sense experiences that contradicted them more. The reason we think, perhaps, that we might be dreaming, is because we have an experience of something else which is clearly not dreaming which we have more certainty in.

Basically, what Moore is trying to illustrate is that we are generally more certain about the existence and reality of our own hands and the physical experiences that we have than any tenuous argument that a philosopher could make concerning the logical possibility of the non-existence of the external world. I'm simply because something is a logical possibility, and has not been demonstrated to be impossible, does not mean we should take it seriously.

I'm not claiming that these are knock-down arguments, I don't think there really is such a thing very often in the realm of philosophy, but I think they are arguments that should at least be honestly grappled with and have some interesting aspects to them, and perhaps even some merit.