---
published: true
title: 'The Foundations of Mathematics: My Layman Take'
tags: ["epistemology"]
---
I've recently had a bit of a revival in my interest in the philosophy of mathematics, and although it's difficult to do the proper research and learning that would be necessary to cover that subject in an adequate amount of detail and with an adequate amount of rigor in my current state, I do think it might be fun to write down some of my main conclusions about the foundations of mathematics that I've come to over the past few years and which I have touched up and improved slightly in the past few days as I've been researching the philosophy of mathematics once more.

Essentially my view is pretty simple: mathematics is a set of axioms that are constructed by humans, just as the rules of a game like chess are constructed by humans, in order to achieve a particular goal and on the basis of some particular understanding of that goal. Mathematics is, then, essentially "arbitrary", in the sense that it could, in another possible world, have logically been constructed otherwise. This is particularly proven by the fact that mathematics cannot be derived from the axioms of pure logic, and therefore while it is not a language that violates the three laws of thought or logic, it is not a language that can be reduced only to logical axioms either, but need axioms that can be described logically but which are generated otherwise. Just ask, to bring back the earlier example, the rules of chess do not violate the lots of logic, but neither are they derivable directly from the axioms of the laws of project alone. It is unfortunate that the project of mathematical logicism failed, as it would have been very impressive, very cool, and probably quite a clever transformation to reduce all of mathematics purely to the axioms of logic, but it is not a killing blow to find out that it is not the case.

If mathematics is an arbitrary game of this sort, however, what makes it so effective in being able to describe the world around us? Well, for one thing, mathematics is, being constructed, always being adapted and improved, given more tools to describe either things in itself, or things we see around us, and as such, it is not surprising that it is well adapted to describing things around us, since that is what we are constructing to do in the first place. It just does not immediately look as if it were just designed from the ground up to describe useful aspects of the world around us because those aspects have been abstracted out and simplified into the most basic and least specific principles possible before they were added to mathematics, in order to ensure that they are as useful as possible in as many situations as possible and as adaptable as can possibly be needed.

As for the main reason, and the most interesting reason, however, much of mathematics is done not by explicitly looking at the world and then adapting mathematics to it, but by using the intuitions of the mathematicians improving their theorems or constructing new components to add to the set of tools that mathematicians have at their disposal. So the question then becomes, where did these intuitions come from, and why are they so consistently useful for creating a language that is capable of describing things in our world? And the answer to that question is quite simple, but it delves into something that often thought related to mathematics: biology. Specifically, evolutionary biology. For it is clear that the intuitions that human beings have, like the instincts of other animals, are based in heuristics that were developed through the eons that we were evolving, in order to help us process quickly and with less calorie expenditure certain situations and things about the world such that we could act more quickly and more efficiently, and therefore we're more likely to survive. And the more accurate these intuitions generally were, the more likely we would be able to survive. However, these intuitions could not merely Be reduced to our own ideas or our own logic because reasoning things from first principles every time you have to act is very calorie-intensive and slow, and the intuitions could not be made perfectly correct or perfectly provable or obvious either because doing so would require a lot more calories and basically make them not any better than thinking from first principles anyway, and it wasn't necessary when we were developing on the Savannah. That's, human beings have a set of intuitions about what is reasonable and what it's not, and these intuitions can be applied, with the aid of an axiomatic formalism that is based in those intuitions and in our observations as well, to creating new constructs.

The fact that mathematics is constructed can be demonstrated by the fact that it was only less than a hundred years ago, I believe, since the whole foundations of mathematics were shifted over to ZFC set theory, in response to certain paradoxes that were demonstrated in the constructed axiomatic rule set of mathematics as it was before that shift.

It should also be pointed out that much of mathematics is not actually particularly useful for describing our world, and is therefore not used for doing so, and furthermore it should be noted that the fact that mathematics is a language that is extremely flexible and has a lot of range should make it even less surprising that it is capable of accurately describing the world around us, since human natural languages are also capable of accurately describing the world around us, often in terms quite similar to the ones used in mathematics, if slightly less accurate, I'm so if one language, if flexible enough, can accurately describe our world, then why shouldn't another language that is more flexible if more formal, be able to do so?

Thus, I think it is quite obvious that mathematics is not something that is true absolutely, or something that is handed down from on high, or even something that is necessarily derived from how humans think in the way that the laws of thought are. Therefore, among other things, platonism and transcendental idealism, as well as theism or deism, are completely unnecessary hypotheses to explain the effectiveness and origin of mathematics, and positing those theories actually undercuts the connection that mathematics has to reality and to our intuitions which we see every day.