---
published: false
title: The Game Theory of Egoist Societal Norms
---
I discussed these ideas in a previous post, but ever since I made that post, they've been growing and clarifying themselves in my head in a process more akin to metastasization than processing, and I think today is finally the day that they've developed and clarified enough that it's worth producing a second post. So, welcome to "The Game Theory of Egoist Societal Norms" version 2.0!

## Introduction

The purpose of this essay is to analyze the game theoretic interests of egoists with respect to society and societal norms (ethics and laws), and what those interests would lead to in terms of a social equilibrium and set of norms. In this case, I am ignoring the irrational or not strictly egoistic components of the human psyche, such as metaphysical nonsense beliefs such as "divine right of kings" and "social contract theory" or ideology or altruism in general.

## The Nash Equilibrium of Society

Every individual in society has an interest in preventing any other individual in that society from harming, not just themselves. If a man murders my neighbor, although this does not perhaps directly effect me, it indicates that this murder is a threat: if he has murdered my neighbor today, what prevents him from murdering me tomorrow? Furthermore, if I have good relations with my neighbor, then any harm to my neighbor means that my neighbor now cannot enter as beneficial reciprocal relations with me: if they are murdered this is obvious, but if my neighbor is maimed, this means that he cannot help me weed my garden in return for me helping him fix his roof. In addition, even if there is no chance that the man who murdered my neighbor will murder me later (perhaps this man is a racist, and will only try to kill black people, and while my neighbor is black, I am not), if *this* murderer gets away, that might put it in the heads of others who would like to murder people for their own gain (perhaps another racist who only kills white people) that, since the whole rest of society is not united behind preventing murders, they might just be able to get away with doing whatever murder they want to do. The logic of murder, as I'm sure you can clearly see, extends to any other active harm as well.

Every individual in society can have an interest in harming any other individual in that society as well, however. I can gain more, in some cases, by stealing my neighbor's tractor from him, than by paying him for it, after all. (Why am I using so many weird rural analogies? Don't know!) In this way, it seems, we have arrived at an impasse: a free rider problem, where everyone together has an interest in maintaining an order of norms, but where each individual also has an interest in defecting from that order, just as long as everyone else does not, as one person defecting cannot unseat the entire order of norms. It doesn't matter if only *I* steal, that won't undercut the entire system of property! It doesn't matter if only *I* rape, it won't lead to *everyone* raping! It is better, in essence, to be a criminal in a lawful society, than a lawful person in either a criminal or lawful society... or is it?

You see, free rider problems can only emerge when enforcement is not possible (or excluded from consideration), yet the entire situation we are dealing with here is one of enforcement! Thus, we arrive at a Nash equilibria, a combination of strategies on the part of all the different players involved in the game such that each player has no interest in switching strategies. In this case, I both have an interest in violating the norms for my own interests, and preventing anyone else from doing so. Yet, indeed, everyone else has this same exact set of interests. Thus, the fact that everyone else has an interest in preventing anyone from defecting from the social order of norms eliminates my own interest in defending myself, and my own interest (along with that of everyone else in society) in preventing defectors likewise eliminates the interest of any individual in defecting from these norms as well.

Therefore, the egoistic interest I have in helping in the maintenance of a social order of norms that prevents harm, when translated onto everyone else because of their similar interests, leads to everyone having an interest in not violating that order themselves as well (except in extreme cases, such as if I'll literally die for sure anyway unless I violate the social order of norms). And our interest in committing crimes cannot outweigh our desire to prevent others from committing crimes towards us either, such that we reject our interest in preventing the risk of others harming us in order that we might harm others, for a number of reasons, not least among them the fact that whatever benefit we might gain from harming others (such as stealing from them) is itself made less valuable and put at risk by destroying the order that prevents others from harming us (such as stealing what we've just stolen). A thief only benefits from their thievery because the society around them is not in the habit of stealing --- otherwise he wouldn't hold on to his prize very long.

There are other considerations here, too, of course, that exit outside of game theory: the desire to model the norms one wants everyone else to adopt, as that makes it more likely for them to reciprocate, a sense of fairness or justice that might endorse these norms, and so on. I'll leave those aside for now.

## The Properties of Equilibrium Norms

With this established, the next question is this: what norms, exactly, will egoists in such a position select, and what institutions to enforce them, if any? I think that the social norms (or laws) that will naturally allow for this Nash equilibria to develop will have to satisfy four main criteria:

1. Universalized equality
2. A focus on positive harm
3. Intersubjective verifiability and justifiability
4. Overall prosperity

Let me defend each of these criteria in turn.

### Universalized Equality

One of the most important points about the Nash equilibrium described in the first section is that it breaks down as soon as any significant portion of the people in that society are no longer necessarily interested in enforcing it on *everyone else*. As soon as each individual no longer wishes for an exception for himself but for *no one else*, it breaks down, because if one is fine with an exception to the norms for himself and some others, than he and those others can join up, and almost any level of cohesion of such a group beyond the individual can severely damage the working of the society as a whole. Thus, if a group is discriminated against by a set of laws, suddenly they don't have much interest in maintaining those laws towards everyone else in the society, and so two separate and incompatible equilibria arise inside each group, and the incompatibility will cause the groups to clash. The only way to prevent such groups from forming or wanting to form is to make sure that the norms of the society that everyone is operating on are beneficial to each individual in society for everyone else to follow.

Even if a discriminatory set of norms is still beneficial towards the discriminated-against group, they will see that there is a set of norms which does not discriminate but awards the same treatment as the privileged group to every person in that society, and this is a strictly superior set of norms, that they now have an interest in bargaining toward, which upsets the peace in society. Thus it is better to begin with a non-discriminatory set of norms to avoid the upset.

### A Focus on Positive Harm

So everyone must be treated equally by an optimal set of norms that will satisfy the Nash equilibrium situation. What other features should this set of norms have? Well, consider this: if we switch from trying to prevent harm only in this set of norms, and instead try to create a set of norms that grants positive payoffs instead of merely preventing negative outcomes, what happens to the equilibrium point? Well, in order to *grant* positive rewards, resources must be redistributed. But redistribution implies one of two strategies: either resources are redistributed from one group to another (violating universalized equality and upsetting the equilibrium of the social order), or resources are distributed from everyone to everyone, which is cancels out the benefit (if everyone has to give a dollar to everyone else, I'll lose 7 billion dollars and gain 7 billion dollars).

Furthermore, while positive harms are clear and obvious, and clearly distinct from other kinds of harms (it is clear when murder, theft, kidnapping, rape, or assault has occured, and these are clearly distinct from, for instance, me not giving all my money to the poor), other kinds of indirect harms and refusals to grant benefits flow into each other and make it very difficult to provide a good reason for stopping at one point along the line of outlawing indirect harms and not another. Thus while agreeing to prevent positive harms is an obvious focal point for bargaining (akin to agreeing to split a dollar bill 50-50), once you step outside that circle, you can very clearly devolve into a very unfree and authoritarian system as more and more benefits are required to be granted to others.

Moreover, forcing people to grant benefits to others requires positively harming, or at least threatening to positively harm, people who have not themselves harmed others, and so it overall directly increases the positive harm in the system, thereby making it unclear whether everyone in the system actually has an interest in maintaining that equilibrium with respect to everyone else when that system of norms actually harms them directly too.

It should also be noted that a refusal to grant benefits to one's neighbor is not an indication of anything necessarily harmful to oneself, nor does it *lessen* the benefit one gets from having neighbors, so there is less incentive on the part of each member of society to enforce on behalf of others norms that are focused more on granting benefits than those that are focused on preventing positive harm. This causes the equilibrium to dissolve as well, since suddenly each actor only has an incentive to enforce the norms on his own behalf towards those that interact only with him. While everyone has an interest in preventing a risk of harm to oneself, only those who are especially poorly off have any interest in ensuring that benefits are granted to those who are poorly off, so any norm which is focused on helping the more poorly off can't satisfy the general equilibrium state for a whole society.

### Intersubjective Verifiability and Justifiability

Another important component of any system of norms which can satisfy this societal equilibrium is that it must be a set of norms which is based on some objectively ascertainable properties in the world which people can point to and which can be viewed by others. This is not to say that the entire system of norms must be necessarily derivable *from* objective properties of the natural world (in the vein of natural law, which is a romantic and laudable, but ultimately untenable, idea), but that it must have reference, in its rules to some such observable properties. This distinction is a fine one, so let me present an analogy: when I am coming up with the scoring rules for a new sport for me and my friends to play, what counts as a score is not objectively derived from the properties of the ball and the court in which we play, but it can make reference to objectively verifiable facts, such as whether the ball is within a net or inside a painted line, for instance. It is not an objective fact about the ball or the net or the line that *makes* the ball being inside the line or net a score, but when we are constructing rules about scores, it is better to have something like a net or a line to make the rule more obvious to both parties.

In the case of norms, it is also important that these objective properties be inherent and prior to the norms, not constructed by the norms themselves, because intersubjective verifiability is not simply useful for *assessing* whether a norm has been violated, but also in justifying it such that others can accept it. Basing a norm in something objectively verifiable and more importantly *unique* about the violation of the norm aids in constructing a Schelling point around which people in the processes of arriving at consensus about norms can orbit, thus avoiding a slippery slope in any direction or an endless process of petty bargaining.

### Overall Prosperity

The most important but most subtle of all of the necessary criteria for a good set of norms that will engage the Nash equilibrium we desire is that the set of norms must not depress the natural productivity and wealth of everyone in the society *below* the state that they would have if they were to just abandon society altogether. Thus, norms which are known to actually harm the prosperity of society or cause mass famines and hunger must be dismissed immediately, as norms which cause harm overall cannot be also preventing harm, and so aren't choiceworthy by self-interested actors.

Moreover, there may be multiple focal point norm sets which can satisfy all the criteria above, and when selecting between them the best way to operate is on the basis of which one creates a society that is maximally wealthy and prosperous, as everyone prefers living in a more wealthy and prosperous society to a lesser one as long as they both satisfy the equilibrium criteria.

## Summarizing Our Previous Conclusions Toward Libertarianism

Thus we have arrived at a fairly interesting conclusion: the shared norms of an egoist society must satisfy four major criteria in order to be maintained by the egoist society as a whole at an equilibrium point. Any deviation from these criteria on the part of the norms of that society, in the absence of certain mitigating factors (religion, ideology, nationalism, tribalism, or whatever else), will collapse the equilibrium and dump everyone back into a Hobbesian state of nature, waiting for another equilibrium to arise again. Therefore, even if there is another set of norms that might be more beneficial to an individual than one which satisfies these equilibrium criteria, it is beneficial to each individual egoist to maintain and even advocate for the equilibrium norms because such an equilibrium set of norms is better than having no norms at all. Thus, for instance, it might be more beneficial to a majority of society to oppress a minority, but if the minority does not take this as a matter of course and instead fights back, even perhaps enlisting the help of some of the majority that don't get the benefits for whatever reason, this dumps the society into a massive and protracted civil war that is certainly worse than the peaceful but non-optimal (for some people) equilibrium state. Likewise, if a society decides to milk its most skilled and productive people for profit, because it directly benefits them more, these people can leave or fight back, upsetting the equilibrium, not to mention that it is non-optimal as far as actual economic theory goes. Furthermore, although in a system of norms that prevents something like welfare from developing by force, there is a chance that some in the society will lose out and be on the bottom rung (12.3% of households in the United States have trouble consistently providing food to their members), where they would stand to gain a lot from changing to a set of norms that breaks these equilibrium criteria in order to allow welfare, they would be worse off in a society where no equilibrium norms have been arrived at at all, in a Hobbesian state of nature, since there would be an equal or greater chance of starving, and a far greater chance of actually being actively harmed by people who now have no incentive not to commit crimes because there’s no equilibrium enforcement of social norms against harm.

The equilibrium criteria themselves make this even more interesting, because they actually denote a rather harsh and difficult to satisfy set of requirements for a system of ethics or norms. First of all, they must treat every individual as exactly equal with respect to what they can and cannot do: no individual may harm any other individual. This already eliminates almost all forms of government (as no special privileges can be granted to officers of the state) and a lot of different conflict-based systems of ethics or political philosophy (proletariat vs bourgeois, Aryans vs Jews, etc). Second, the focus on positive harm basically eliminates any form of egalitarian collectivism or left-libertarianism (in the traditional sense), as they operate on the basis of the idea that refusing to grant people a benefit of yours is a kind of harm that should be outlawed by enforced social norms. Instead, this system must focus on preventing interference with the person (or property, however we decide to define that) of someone else directly, and in fact enforcing the granting of benefits is not only outside that equilibrium, but in fact violates it because it requires doing or threatening positive harm to individuals who have not done the same to others and therefore towards which no one has an interest in directing their ire, meaning that everyone (in the equilibrium) has an interest in directing their ire towards the enforcer. Third, whatever criteria are arrived at must be intersubjectively verifiable (so not based on fuzzy concepts like labor-value, need, or skill, but instead on consent or obvious physical boundaries)  and intersubjectively justifiable (must be a Schelling point of some kind, a unique position that doesn’t have any obvious bargaining transitions along a gradient toward other positions). Fourth, in selecting between sets of norms that satisfy these criteria (of which I think there is really only one, to be honest), we must bias heavily toward a set of norms that has known good economic outcomes overall.

There are twop main sets of norms that I can think of that satisfy the first set of criteria, and they both fall under the general heading of free(d) market anarchism:

1. Mutualism
3. Left-Rothbardianism

In both of these cases, everyone has the same moral rights as everyone else, and he focus is on preventing harm to person or property (of some kind), not governing society in order to redistribute wealth or removing hierarchies or creating democracies. In both of these cases, the property and harm norms are largely based on obvious physical characteristics of a situation (either homesteading/labor-mixing or usufruct/occupation).

However, I think that there is a severe problem with mutualism: surrendering all of your means of production to the commons means surrendering it to the *tragedy* of the commons. Furthermore, there are real important economic tasks and calculations made possible by investors, capitalists, unilateral entrepreneurs who can then hire people later, and even renters. Thus the idea that land and the means of production cannot be owned is economically problematic. More, having a field you just tilled, or a bunch of machines that you worked very hard to earn the money to buy, taken away from you by the people you tried to hire to work them for you is something that I think would clearly be classified as a harm, as you're basically having your property stolen. Indeed, as well, mutualism seems to arbitrarily dismiss the legitimacy or possibility of simply having the workers that you hire to use the machines you bought or built sign a contract saying they'll make no claim to the machines themselves, and a violation of promises is an obvious harm that most societies have naturally developed norms against for good reason.

Furthermore, usufruct could also lead to all sorts of problems that undercut the intersubjective verifiability of it as a norm: if I leave my house to travel for awhile (staying at hotels in the meantime), can someone just move into my house while I'm gone? If I till and sow seeds in a field, can someone just come along later and and fuck up what I did because nobody can own land? If not, how do we determine what the norms are for this besides some kind of labor-mixing or homesteading?

**Note**: On this subject, I have two articles that I'd like to recommend you read. The [first](http://www.daviddfriedman.com/Academic/Property/Property.html), by David Friedman, is a game-theoretic positive account of how property rights make a good Schelling point when bargaining with others about norms. The [second](https://mises.org/library/ethics-and-economics-private-property), by Hans-Hermann Hoppe, demonstrates why homesteading is a good norm, as it is a reasonable, generally applicable, and generally intersubjectively justifiable and verifiable norm for dealing with property, which is necessary for a solid economic order.

## What This Means for the Individual Egoist

