---
title: "Human Being and the World, Part II"
tags: ["human-being", "existentialism", "nihilism", "ethics", "religion"]
toc: true
---

> “There is no longer a single idea explaining everything, but an infinite number of essences giving a meaning to an infinite number of objects.  The world comes to a stop, but also lights up.” 
> 	― Albert Camus

## 1. Introduction

In my previous essay in this series, ['Human Being and the World, Part I'](https://tbdp-web.github.io/blog/2021/10/11/life-meaning.html), I talked about the core facts of what it is *like* to be human. How our consciousness operates, how we perceive and interact with ourselves and the world around us. I examined how our thrownness, being embedded in and shaped by existence, is crucial to us being alive in the first place. I also hinted at the core problems that grow out of this mode of existence that I call 'human Being,' which normative philosophy tries to solve. In this essay, I'll talk a bit more in detail about what those problems are, and why they are a problem.

There are three core problems:

1. Not knowing what we want automatically, but having to guess
2. Desiring to embed ourselves in narratives external to us, instead of embedding everything in our own narrative
3. Knowing that the actions we take indicate intrinsic values and beliefs that we either deny — and become hypocrites — or accept

I will elaborate on why each of these things is a problem in the next sections

## 2. Desire

As I described in my previous essay, there are two layers (or modes) of consciousness: the egoistic layer, and the narrative layer. The egoistic layer is where desire, pleasure, pain, instinct, action, and the basic understanding of the world we experience takes place. The narrative layer, on the other hand, is where our conscious thoughts and experience takes place, where the strange loop of self-awareness becomes possible. These two layers are alien to each other; the narrative layer can only look at the egoistic layer from the outside, guessing what is going on inside it by the vague feelings that it exports — the rewards for certain states of being, pain, pleasure, joy, fulfillment, sadness. There is no table in the egoistic layer that contains a set of propositions describing what will make you happy, only a vague mechanism, like a high-dimensional reward function. Desire is a vector, not a destination, and the narrative layer must take those vectors and try to triangulate the final destination, if there is one. Sometimes there is, and sometimes the desires, being the product of a fuzzy and imprecise intuitive mechanism, are contradictory and cannot all be satisfied. You never know in advance.

In most cases, it is easy to figure out where your desires are pointing, so easy, in fact, that the narrative layer fools itself into thinking that it is directly *introspecting* into the contents of the desires of the egoistic layer. This is still not the case, however; what is really happening is that there is enough data, and the data is clear enough, that it is such a simple task to abduct the correct answer that it seems trivial. This is seen in other areas, too, when people draw a conclusion so easily from the premises they are given that they barely seem to notice that they have done any reasoning at all. This is the case with desires such as hunger, for instance. But as soon as the desires become more complicated, the task of the narrative layer becomes significantly more difficult: deciding not just that you want to eat, but *what* you want to eat, for instance, or choosing a career path.

One of the tools that the narrative consciousness layer uses to mitigate some of this difficulty is that of consideration, imagining hypothetical scenarios where different attempts are made to satisfy the desires of the egoistic layer, and feeding vivid reconstructions of those states of being to the egoistic layer to see what emotions it returns. Do this well enough, and vividly enough, and it can become much easier to divine where the desire-vectors are pointing, although it is always an inexact science and depends one one's ability to actually accurately imagine these states.

This tool, again, might make it seem like the desires of the egoistic layer are available to the introspection of the narrative layer, since presenting a situation to the egoistic layer and consulting the feelings that are returned is a similar process to simply considering the question "do I want X?" and examining the answer that results. This is still not what is actually happening, however; first of all, this process of getting desires based on hypothetical imaginings is based on one's ability to accurately picture what the results of a situation are. Secondly, you are not getting back a yes or a no, but a feeling, and that does not rule out the fact that that feeling might be greater for something else, or might change later. Third, these feelings that are returned are not always consistent, and can change given even a few seconds. Fourth, our knowledge about our desires is not transparent to us, but limited to what we can think to check; even if we pretend that sending a hypothetical to the egoistic layer of consciousnes is a table lookup, we still do not have access to the full table, and so we don't have access to all the complexities of our desires, only to the results they give based on the things we can guess to check, which means we will always be missing details because complex things have a very low probability of being guessed in their entire detail.

Thus, human beings are left with a singular problem: we have little idea of what we truly want, what will truly bring us happiness and fulfillent, even when we think we might have found it. This is why virtue ethics fundamentally fails: it tries to divine a description of the desires of *other* people, when we hardly know what our own desires are! [(This is why I am an egoist first and foremost)](https://tbdp-web.github.io/blog/2021/12/08/egoism.html). Even though virtue ethics could overcome the is-ought gap, by appealing to desires directly (something Hume said would work), if its philosophers could come up with a reasonably exact set of desires that all human beings share, attempting to do so is pretty much nonsense, especially when you realize that all desires are not compatible, but must be weighed in balance with each other, so that even if we had two desires all human beings shared. I admit that there are some things that all human beings seem to share a general desire for — independance, companionship, society, material welfare — but what satisfies these is so complex, so wide, and so varied that little of normative content can be derived from them.

More than this, since desires are not destinations, not propositions describing states of affairs inscribed on the stone table of our mind, desires can never be truly satisfied. There will always be some overshot, or some undershot, of what we actually want, and our desires can shift based on past experiences of satisfied desires, too. So the process of desire-satisfaction is a process of always moving toward, but never reaching, equilibrium.

In fact, desires inherently cannot be satisfied in one's lifetime, because the process of life itself inherently *means* that some desires are not satisfied yet! To cease desiring things, is to cease desiring life with which to do and achieve things, to cease desiring life itself, and therefore to die, because life requires maintenence. This is why Buddhism is death itself, why the 'Four Noble Truths' are a syllogism of death. Quoting from Wikipedia:

1. Suffering is an innate characteristic of existence in the world.
2. Suffering arises from desire.
3. The cessation of desire can be attained by renouncing desire.
4. The Eightfold Path is the path leading to the renouncement of desire and the cessation of suffering.

If suffering (the dissatisfaction of desire) is life, and ceasing to desire would end suffering, then ceasing desire would end life because life is suffering. And this is true: desiring things that you don't yet have is what leads you to maintain your life, to eat, to drink, to exercise. To stop desiring those things would be to die.

There is more wrong with this response to the fact that your desires are unknowable and unsatisfiable in an ultimate sense, however. To give up on all desires because your desires cannot be satisfied is to make perfect the enemy of good: yes, your desires cannot be perfectly, finally satisfied, but they can be satisfied to some degree, and giving up on those pleasures, some very notable and worthwhile, because sometimes you will have pain, or can't have all the pleasure you want, is foolish.

Likewise, positing something which can fully and permanently satisfy your desires is itself positing death, or, if you believe you can continue to live without desiring more things, an existence of eternal stagnation, in which you exist in a sort of stasis, never changing, never doing anything meaningful. This is the reality which Christians propose, accepting the dichotemy that says that either one must have a perfect satisfaction of desire, or it would be better to never want anything at all. This isn't to mention the fact that the existence of a desire for something does not itself provide evidence that it exists — the desires that we have sometimes correlate to things that exist, but they don't always, because human beings are creatures of imagination, and we can construct impossible, counterfactual hypotheticals to show to our egoistic layer of consciousness and get feelings about. Those 'natural desires' (to use C.S. Lewis' imprecise and imbecile terminology) that we have that do seem to necessarily correspond to earl things exist because the things they point at are physically, verifiably necessary for our survival, and if we did not have a desire for them we would die. This is why we desire food and it also exists: not because desires are necessarily correlated with reality, not because the existence of food caused us to desire it, not because our desire caused food to exist, but because we exist as creatures that require sustinence, we would have died out had that sustinence not been avaiable and so the only creatures living are ones that have food for them to eat, and we needed some reward in our reward function to motivate us to eat without the need to reason it out from the top down. That is all.[^1]

[^1]: If you can show me, with the same accuracy as we know this about food, that human beings require a relationship with a *real, existant* god (and not just the idea of one) to continue existing, so that if that was not present we would have died out, and so that it would make sense for us to develop a desire to motivate use to form that connection, by all means, make your argument from desire for the existence of a god: only realize that now, in the process, you have to provide evidence that that god is real by other means, and so your argument is moot. Crucially, realize that saying that human beings require a god to exist because they require a creator is not the same thing, as it does not demonstrate the need for humans to *act* (and hence *have a desire*), because that relation is one way. You need to provide evidence that to continue existing for long humans require a two-way connection with a real god, one that requires action on the part of both parties, in the way that food requires eating and acquisition. I know many religious people *claim* you need their god in order to live, but this has never been demonstrated to be true in any serious manner, especially not one that requires their god to be real and not just an idea, a concept, and something around which a community of mutual aid can form.

## 3. The 'Meaning of Life'

The second problem that humans face is the result of a *specific* desire, that I feel comfortable in making such certain statements about because it is the  necessary prerequisite for the egoistic and narrative layers of our consciousness to function together: the desire to construct narratives itself. Even here, I will try to avoid being overly specific about this desire.

In general, though, the principle on which it works is simple: there is a term in the reward function of the egoistic layer of consciousness which stands for the desire to "run," or switch to, the narrative mode or layer; the function of the narrative layer, in turn, is to weave our past actions, our current situation, and the features, objects, and facts of the world around us into the most coherent narrative it can make. This is then what it uses to generate thoughts out of, to process things using our reasoning abilities, and so on, the results and actions of which are all woven back into the narrative. When this narrative is disrupted, the narrative layer incapable of fulfilling its function fully, crises emerge: PTSD, identity crises, self-hatred, despair.

The way the narrative layer usually works is that it weaves other things into a narrative based around the self: a story about who you are, what happened to you, and how that shaped you. The self is the anchor to everything else, it looks at objects of consciousness and asks "what is this thing's relation to me?" When the awareness is turned upon onself, when consciousness itself becomes its own object, there are two ways of processing self-awareness into the narrative layer:

The first, is the most logical, but also, in this day and age, the rarest: one looks at the self and only changes the object of the sentence's verb above, which is the object of awareness, and nothing else, because all that has changed is the object of awareness, and so only the object of awareness need be replaced in the thought process. Thus the sentence becomes "what is my relation to me?" Thus the only thing of import when considering oneself would be what one wants, what one things of oneself and one's character, etc. All would be relative to the self, nothing would matter outside of my desires and what I choose, all would be based on the nexus that is me.

The second thing that can happen is all-too-common, and very dangerous. When the object of awareness is moved, the sentence is changed, but it is changed more than is made strictly necessary by this change in the object of awareness, because *the person doing the thinking is used to analyzing an object in terms of its relation to a narrative apart from itself.* That is, when you look at something outside yourself, you are also outside it, and so its relation to you is that of one between two separate things; whereas when you look at yourself, your own relation to yourself is a relation of two identities that are interpenitrated (and identical). Thus, not only the object of the verb is changed, but the thing it is related "to." Of course, then the question becomes, what should this second thing be replaced *by?* We have a sentence that asks "what is my relation to..." what? What should I measure myself up to?

This confusion opens us up to all sorts of fallacious answers, because *all* answers to this question must be fallacious, because there is no "right" answer. Just as reading from a random location in memory that hasn't been filled or erased gives gibberish answers, so too are the answers given to this question, which is the core of the question 'what is the meaning of life' question for most people. People substitute communities, Gods, movements, ideologies. They submit their interests, and the narrative *they* want to spin about their life, to the 'grander' narratives of other people instead. It is not wrong to join a community, a movement, to subscribe to an ideology, but when these things go from "*I* am doing these things because they represent *my* values and because *I* want to" to "I am nothing without these things, these things define who I am, I must do what they say," that is when the narrative has shifted. It is often slow and subtle, but it happens and can happen to all of us. It happens especially to religious people: their identity is subsumed by the identity of 'being a Christian.' They speak, think, and talk of nothing else, they *are* a Christian and nothing else besides, their whole life revolves around this one thing. One way to prevent this subsumption of personal narrative under collective narrative is to have many identities and interests: these things are, at base, when they do not overcome you, a descriptor of a part of who you already are, not a commitment or a duty, and so the more identities you have, the more closely and accurately you represent, encode, and are helped to remember who you are. This is an inexact thing, it does not solve the problem, but it *can* help.

## 4. The Values in Our Actions

The final problem that human beings *qua* human Being face is the fact that, our actions being controlled also by the narrative layer of our consciousness, which cannot help but generate beliefs and maxims about the permissibility of our actions in the process of acting, any action we take implies a statement. It implies that we think that that action is permissible. And if we are to apply our reason, to avoid special pleading, that means that we view that action as permissible in all relevantly similar circumstances. In the face of this, we must either become a hypocrite, and condemn in others what we do not condemn in ourselves, or we must acknowledge the same rights in others that we seize for ourselves. Each of these has consequences, as all choices have consequences.

Thus, as Sartre said in ['Existentialism Is A Humanism'](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/sartre/works/exist/sartre.htm):

>When a man commits himself to anything, fully realising that he is not  only choosing what he will be, but is thereby at the same time a  legislator deciding for the whole of mankind – in such a moment a man  cannot escape from the sense of complete and profound responsibility.  There are many, indeed, who show no such anxiety. But we affirm that  they are merely disguising their anguish or are in flight from it.  Certainly, many people think that in what they are doing they commit no  one but themselves to anything: and if you ask them, “What would happen  if everyone did so?” they shrug their shoulders and reply, “Everyone  does not do so.” But in truth, one ought always to ask oneself what  would happen if everyone did as one is doing; nor can one escape from  that disturbing thought except by a kind of self-deception.

This is why, in my own philosophy, when I think about how I want everyone to act, how I want society to be, I act in a way that would facilitate that; and when I think about how I want to be, I grant others the right to be that way too — even if it has some detriment to me, I cannot judge.

## 5. Conclusion

This essay was much shorter than the previous one, in part because less setup was necessary to introduce the series, and in part because this essay specifically existed only to draw out some parts of the analysis that were already embrionic in the previous essay. The next essay will probably be even shorter, as it, too, is a distillation, a drawing-out, of things that are already present in this analysis, in order to suggest the direction for a solution more clearly than it is already suggested here.
