---
published: true
title: What Is Philosophy?
tags: ["meta-philosophy"]
---
I recently began a discussion with one of my friends in our Discord server which we agreed to finish in our upcoming philosophy meeting this week, as we intend to begin that tradition again now that I've recovered from a recent setback and I'm feeling study again. However, I'm going to make this short voice dictated article on it just because I had originally intended to make another article, but forgotten the topic on which I'd wanted to do it, but still have the desire to make an article, and this topic is as good as any.

The topic of this article will be the purpose of philosophy. This has, essentially, two very closely interlinked components that need answering under its heading: First, what subjects philosophy should cover and the extent to which it should cover them, and second, why human beings do philosophy in the first place. The second must of course be answered in light of the first, but likewise the first must in some sense be answered as part of the second, because if we do not know what philosophy covers, then it is difficult to explain why we do it, and if we do not know why we do philosophy and at least some capacity, then it is difficult to explain what it should cover. As such I'll essentially answer these two questions as a single question, as the explanation will be deeply interlinked, but please keep in mind that there are two separate questions at play here, even if they must be answered in an intermingled fashion.

As I see it, the fundamental reason that human beings do philosophy is in order to clarify our understanding of ourselves and the world. If we have a perfect intuitive understanding of the world, or, alternatively, if it did not matter to us whether we understood the world or not, either because we had no choice in our understanding and could not expand it, or no choice in our actions and so could not act on the basis of our understanding, or because reality somehow did not punish us for acting on the basis of wrong understandings, then of course philosophy would not be particularly interesting. However, it is the case that we can be mistaken on first approximation in our understanding of almost everything about the world, even the things that seem most obvious and intuitive to us. Although our intuitions can lend us some guidance, acting as a pointer and springboard for further investigation, our intuitions are quite often wrong. Likewise, not only can our first approximation of understanding via intuition and simple observation be mistaken, but there is a penalty for being mistaken, as beliefs inform actions and actions have consequences both to ourselves and others. Of course, beliefs have varying degrees of consequences — some beliefs do not present a very large risk to us if they turn out to be wrong, while others prevent a very great risk indeed — but all incorrect beliefs have some sort of consequence. Even beliefs that could not possibly inform direct action, such perhaps as beliefs concerning the nature of mathematics, can inform other beliefs or prevent forming other beliefs which might be correct and might lead to more accurate forms of action down the road. Alternatively, beliefs that have absolutely no connection to action in any fashion whatsoever, if they exist as I am not altogether sure that they do, form an unnecessary burden on our thinking and in that sense half a penalty themselves as well. Thus, we are fallible, and our fallibility has tangible impact on us. This is where philosophy comes in. Philosophy, as the love of wisdom, is the investigation of truth. It is the attempt to form more accurate beliefs.

Hence, in a sense, the foundation of philosophy is epistemology, if we can understand what it means for I believe to be true or accurate, and how we should go about forming these beliefs, then most of the work of philosophy is done. We have arrived at a system that guides us to correct beliefs, and as such, we have in a sense achieved what we care about. Furthermore, if we do not understand what it means for a belief to be true or accurate, and we do not understand how to arrive at true or accurate beliefs, then of course no philosophy or anything else can proceed in anything like a useful fashion, as we are groping around blind in the dark. However, although the most important task of philosophy is perhaps epistemology, it's job does not end there. After all, once we have an epistemology, we must then set ourselves the task of actually using the system that we have developed in order to arrive at accurate beliefs. This of course requires observations and empirical testing and confirming with others and other things that we would consider part of science, and not philosophy, but it also includes things that are necessarily philosophical and not empirical, such as conceptual clarification, the working out of the implications of empirical observations, and the selection of the most accurate interpretations of those empirical observations and the construction of theories in order to explain and predict them. All of these things, since they primarily use the mind and involve reason and similar faculties over empiricism, could more accurately be termed philosophy. However, if philosophy is the love of wisdom, there is a sense in which science should be categorized under philosophy. After all, science, like these other secondary applications of philosophy, is merely the application of epistemology in order to arrive at true beliefs, which is what these other secondary fields of philosophy are doing as well, just with less of a focus on empirical data. This is why I actually like the designation of science as natural philosophy: If the purpose and interest in philosophy is arriving at true beliefs and the fundamental task of philosophy is epistemology first and foremost, as is hinted at by the definition of philosophy as the love of wisdom, then anything that is the systematic attempt to arrive at true beliefs using epistemology as determined by more basic philosophy should be categorized as philosophy as well, and this includes science. Of course, The methods unique to science are quite different than the methods of philosophy used in other fields of philosophy and in the activity of science surrounding those unique methods, and so it is equally as valid, especially when stressing these differences, to view philosophy and science as separate, with the core of the separation being that while science has a particular focus on peer review and empirical observation, philosophy has more of a focus on linguistics, conceptual clarification, the analysis of the implications and definitions and relations of concepts, and other more rationalistic endeavors. Both are equally necessary, extremely so, but there is a duality here.

Of course, there is more to philosophy than this. Four, there are some areas that are simply extremely difficult to explore with empirical observation and the scientific method (insofar as science can be said to have a method). These generally include areas that have to do with the human mind, since as of yet the human mind is far too complex to understand by pure empirical observation, And is better understood by a compliment of empirical observation through psychology and neurology and philosophy through introspection and analysis. Perhaps in the future, as has happened with many other fields that were formally the soul domain of philosophy, science will find the tools and conceptual resources to subsume this, but I find this unlikely due to the complexity. Thus I would include under the heading of philosophy and its domain such things as ethics, which is the attempt to uncover the most basic and necessary values that human beings share and to understand the implication of those values on the general rules that we use to determine what is permissible and information in our actions, and political philosophy both as an extension of ethics and an extension of sociology, and even sociology itself.

I would also like to point out that I think in modern science there is, at least in the humanities such as psychology and social science, a dearth of accurate conceptual analysis and philosophical reasoning. Four, it should be noted that since philosophies domain has most often included a rationalistic investigation of the realities that we must deal with, it has constructed a very robust set of tools for understanding the implications of evidence and argument, the proper structures of argument, and how to do conceptual analysis. The harder sciences which can rely more heavily on purely empirical and predictive methods have less use for these philosophical tools, but ironically the science is which have the least opportunity to rely to heavily on empiricism are the ones that often forget most profoundly the tools that philosophy offers them.

That's in essence I see the purpose of philosophy as helping us understand how to form correct beliefs, and what correct even means, and then also, through its subdomains, the actual working out and practical use of these tools of understanding and coming to correct conclusions. Thus there is a sense in which science remains natural philosophy, a subfield of philosophy dedicated to using the tools of epistemology that philosophy provides in empiricism and such to arrive at correct beliefs about the external world, but also a sense in which it is a separate discipline, as the majority of past philosophy was overwhelmingly rationalistic, and so we can define philosophy as limited to those rationalistic aims, perhaps working out the implications of empirical conclusions, and science as a separate discipline focusing on empiricism. However, once again it should be stress that empiricism ultimately comes from philosophy and science has the same goals as philosophy, so I think it is valid to view science as a form of philosophy. Those who stress the difference, or even condemn philosophy, have misapprehended the nature of science and its origins.

However, none of this is to suggest, as many of the apologists, theologians, and common people of faith who scream scientism constantly do, that empiricism is just as valid as rationalism or subjectivism, or even less so, in the process of understanding the external world. Nor do I attempt to say that empiricism is subordinate to rationalism. Far from it. Rationalism, the application of reason to conceptual analysis and the study of arguments and implications, gains its validity and its usefulness from the prior work of the foundations of epistemology, which is the same place that empiricism itself gains its validity and usefulness from. It is true that this foundational epistemology is itself derived from reason and introspection, things commonly thought of as rationalistic, but that reason itself explains why, in all other domains, rationalism and empiricism should be placed on the same footing, and also confined to different domains of usefulness. Rationalism should not be used to determine truths about the external world purely, but as a help to empiricism in working out its implications. Likewise, empiricism cannot coherently be used to work out conceptual implications, and neither can it be used to understand epistemology and truths about what we are thinking and so on, since empiricism itself is not empirically demonstrable, nor are my own internal thoughts and reasonings empirically to demonstrable. Empiricism, since it is based on the senses which are linked to the external world, is of primary use for understanding the external world, and rationalism, since it is primarily linked to our internal minds, our best for understanding our internal minds, including how we should arrive at truth. They can of course overlap, as we can use our minds in order to parse out the information that observation gives us, but they have unique and separate domains.