---
title: "Sources on Transgender Issues"
toc: true
published: true
tags: ["politics", "ethics", "lgbtq", "transgender"]
---

## Resources on gender identity

* ["Don't Fix Us" by Alexis Purslante](https://blog.alexisdumas.org/2022/06/05/dont-fix-us.html) spends most of its length after the introduction primarily dealing with what gender is and how it is separate from biological sex
* Various excellent resources regarding various trans topics can be found on [Julia Serano's blog](https://www.juliaserano.com/writings.html).

## Functional similarities between transgender brains and the brains of the gender they identify with

1. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18761592/>:
"We revealed a cerebral activation pattern in MTF transsexuals compared with male controls similar to female controls compared with male controls during viewing of erotic stimuli, indicating a tendency of female-like cerebral processing in transsexualism."
2. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18056697/>:
"These data suggest a pattern of activation away from the biological sex [on the part of male-to-female transsexuals (MTFRs)], occupying an intermediate position with predominantly female-like features. Because our MFTRs were nonhomosexual, the results are unlikely to be an effect of sexual practice. Instead, the data implicate that transsexuality may be associated with sex-atypical physiological responses in specific hypothalamic circuits, possibly as a consequence of a variant neuronal differentiation."

## Structural similarities between transgender brains and the brains of the gender they identify with

1. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18980961/>:
"We showed for the first time that INAH3 volume and number of neurons of male-to-female transsexual people is similar to that of control females. The female-to-male transsexual subject had an INAH3 volume and number of neurons within the male control range, even though the treatment with testosterone had been stopped three years before death. The castrated men had an INAH3 volume and neuron number that was intermediate between males (volume and number of neurons P > 0.117) and females (volume P > 0.245 and number of neurons P > 0.341). There was no difference in INAH3 between pre-and post-menopausal women, either in the volume (P > 0.84) or in the number of neurons (P < 0.439), indicating that the feminization of the INAH3 of male-to-female transsexuals was not due to estrogen treatment. We propose that the sex reversal of the INAH3 in transsexual people is at least partly a marker of an early atypical sexual differentiation of the brain and that the changes in INAH3 and the BSTc may belong to a complex network that may structurally and functionally be related to gender identity."
2. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27646840/>: "While most people take identification with their body for granted, conditions such as phantom limb pain, alien hand syndrome, and xenomelia suggest that the feeling of bodily congruence is constructed and susceptible to alteration. Individuals with xenomelia typically experience one of their limbs as over-present and aversive, leading to a desire to amputate the limb. Similarly, many transgender individuals describe their untreated sexed body parts as incongruent and aversive, and many experience phantom body parts of the sex they identify with (Ramachandran, 2008). This experience may relate to differences in brain representation of the sexed body part, as suggested in xenomelia (McGeoch et al., 2011)...  [The findings of this study] suggest that dysphoria related to gender-incongruent body parts in FtM individuals may be tied to differences in neural representation of the body and altered white matter connectivity."

## Hormone therapy helps make the brains of transgender people congruent with their gender and their body

1. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28523232/>: "Differences between male and female control groups were found only in the auditory RSN, whereas differences between both control groups and MtFs were found in the auditory and fronto-parietal RSNs, including both primary sensory areas (e.g. calcarine gyrus) and higher order cognitive areas such as the middle and posterior cingulate and dorsomedial prefrontal cortex. Overall, differences in MtFs compared with men and women were more pronounced before cross-sex hormonal treatment. Interestingly, rs-FC between MtFs and women did not differ significantly after treatment. When comparing hormonally untreated and treated MtFs, we found differences in connectivity of the calcarine gyrus and thalamus in the context of the auditory network, as well as the inferior frontal gyrus in context of the fronto-parietal network."

2. <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41386-018-0140-7>: "The extant literature describing neuroimaging outcomes among transgender populations focuses primarily on questions of how similar the brain of the transgender individual is to their natal sex and whether use of GAHT [gender-affirming hormone therapy] enhances similarity between the brain of their natal sex and that of their desired gender. Most, but not all studies, indicate that the transgender individual is more similar to their preferred gender with respect to cerebral and gray matter volume and performance on gender-biased cognitive tasks (e.g., verbal and spatial tasks). There is a signal for GAHT to enhance the transgender individuals’ similarity to their preferred gender."

## Conversion therapy does not work, and causes harm

1. <https://web.archive.org/web/20210511221943/https://www.psychotherapy.org.uk/media/cptnc5qm/mou2-reva_0421_web.pdf>: "For the purposes of this document ’conversion therapy’ is an umbrella term for a therapeutic
approach, or any model or individual viewpoint that demonstrates an assumption that any sexual orientation or gender identity is inherently preferable to any other, and which attempts to bring about a change of sexual orientation or gender identity, or seeks to suppress an individual’s expression of sexual orientation or gender identity on that basis. Signatory organisations agree that the practice of
conversion therapy, whether in relation to sexual
orientation or gender identity, is unethical and
potentially harmful."
2. <https://psycnet.apa.org/buy/1994-34347-001>: "The literature in psychotherapeutic and religious conversion therapies is reviewed, showing no evidence indicating that such treatments are effective in their intended purpose. A need for empirical data on the potentially harmful effects of such treatments is established. Ethical considerations relative to the ongoing stigmatizing effects of conversion therapies are presented."
3. <https://www.equalitytexas.org/conversion-therapy/>: "No credible scientific study has ever supported the claims of conversion therapists to change a person’s sexual orientation. A 2009 report by an American Psychological Association Task Force found that 'results of scientifically valid research indicate that it is unlikely that individuals will be able to reduce same-sex attractions or increase other-sex sexual attractions through [sexual orientation change efforts].' ...

According to The Trevor Project’s 2020 National Survey on LGBTQ+ Youth Mental Health... youth who reported undergoing conversion therapy reported more than twice the rate of attempting suicide in the past year compared to those who did not.

Furthermore, a peer-reviewed study published by The Trevor Project in the American Journal of Public Health found that LGBTQ+ youth who underwent conversion therapy were more than twice as likely to report having attempted suicide and more than 2.5 times as likely to report multiple suicide attempts in the past year." **(there's a lot more in this article as well)**
4. <https://irct.org/media-and-resources/latest-news/article/1027>: "To expose how conversion therapy constitutes torture taking place at a global scale, the IFEG today published an expert statement, which is underpinned by a global research report from the IRCT. The expert statement confirms that the practice of conversion therapy violates the basic human rights of individuals and the standards and ethics of the medical and mental health professions, with no medical or scientific validity. The act of conversion therapy is cruel, inhuman and degrading and, in many cases, torture and should be made illegal in all countries... Electroconvulsive therapy, aversive treatments using electric shocks or vomit-inducing drugs, exorcism or ritual cleansing (often involving violence while reciting religious verse), force-feeding and food deprivation, forced nudity, and forced isolation and confinement are some of the more extreme examples of conversion therapy... According to the IFEG, even '[t]alk or psychotherapy can also become a repeatedly traumatic event. Session after session, the individual is confronted with their own “deviancy,” while repetition and duration increase its intensity and importance. We have seen that conversion therapies can lead to avoidance behaviours, hypervigilance (e.g., difficulty falling or staying asleep), intrusive flashbacks, traumatic nightmares, and other symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder.'"

## Gender transition is extremely effective

1. <https://whatweknow.inequality.cornell.edu/topics/lgbt-equality/what-does-the-scholarly-research-say-about-the-well-being-of-transgender-people/>: 
"We conducted a systematic literature review of all peer-reviewed articles published in English between 1991 and June 2017 that assess the effect of gender transition on transgender well-being. We identified 55 studies that consist of primary research on this topic, of which 51 (93%) found that gender transition improves the overall well-being of transgender people, while 4 (7%) report mixed or null findings. We found no studies concluding that gender transition causes overall harm. As an added resource, we separately include 17 additional studies that consist of literature reviews and practitioner guidelines.

The scholarly literature makes clear that gender transition is effective in treating gender dysphoria and can significantly improve the well-being of transgender individuals. Among the positive outcomes of gender transition and related medical treatments for transgender individuals are improved quality of life, greater relationship satisfaction, higher self-esteem and confidence, and reductions in anxiety, depression, suicidality, and substance use."

2. <https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1365-2265.2009.03625.x>:
"We identified 28 eligible studies. These studies enrolled 1833 participants with GID (1093 male-to-female, 801 female-to-male) who underwent sex reassignment that included hormonal therapies... Pooling across studies shows that after sex reassignment, 80% of individuals with GID reported significant improvement in gender dysphoria (95% CI = 68–89%; 8 studies; I2 = 82%); 78% reported significant improvement in psychological symptoms (95% CI = 56–94%; 7 studies; I2 = 86%); 80% reported significant improvement in quality of life (95% CI = 72–88%; 16 studies; I2 = 78%); and 72% reported significant improvement in sexual function (95% CI = 60–81%; 15 studies; I2 = 78%)."

3. <https://www.gendergp.com/risk-into-perspective-for-trans-patients/>:
"[quoting from an article about a study instead of the study itself because the article does a better job of boiling the information down] In this study there were 3,398 patients, 16 mentioned regret or detransition. 12 attribute this to social pressure, and only 3 de-transitioned with no intention to transition again. That’s 3 people from a sample of 3,398 trans people. That’s 0.088% of people sampled. Literally less than 1 in 1000 people seeking treatment to aid transition. Therefore the successful treatment rate is 99.92% of people treated being trans, and happy with the results of treatment."

4. <https://ajp.psychiatryonline.org/doi/10.1176/appi.ajp.2019.19010080>: "In this first total population study of transgender individuals with a gender incongruence diagnosis, the longitudinal association between gender-affirming surgery and reduced likelihood of mental health treatment lends support to the decision to provide gender-affirming surgeries to transgender individuals who seek them."

5. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6974860/>: "There was significant difference between transsexual individuals before surgery and after surgery in mean score of happiness (P<0.01) (t=−4/84). Moreover, there was significant difference between the two groups in mean score of mental health (P<0.01) (f=19/13)."

6. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6546862/>: "Current studies indicate that quality of life improves after sex reassignment surgery. The available studies are heterogeneous in design. In the future, prospective studies with standardized methods of assessing quality of life and with longer follow-up times would be desirable."

7. <https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/327272>: "Dr. Hess and colleagues surveyed 156 people who had all had gender reassignment surgery 6.61 years prior to the study, on average. The survey included open-ended questions regarding the participants’ “general, optical, and functional contentedness” with the surgery. The participants were also asked about their psychosocial well-being and quality of life. The latter was assessed at two different points in time throughout the transition process. Overall, 71 percent of the participants reported feeling very satisfied with the “optical and functional results” of the surgery, with 76.2 percent of the participants saying that they were able to achieve orgasms. The authors conclude: “We could detect a distinct improvement of general and trans-specific [quality of life] and psychosocial resources in our transgender cohort within [the] transition process.""
8. <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-80687-2>: "Pretreatment, TrM and TrW scored lower “self” on the BM test than controls. Their functional connections were weaker in the anterior cingulate-, mesial prefrontal-cortex (mPFC), precuneus, the left angular gyrus, and superior parietal cortex of the DMN, and ACC in the SN “Self” identification and connectivity in the mPFC in both TrM and TrW increased from scan 1 to 2, and at scan 2 no group differences remained. The neurobiological underpinnings of GD seem subserved by cerebral structures composing major parts of the DMN."

## Importance of social support

1. <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282464127_Social_Support_Trans_Community_Connectedness_and_Mental_Health_Symptoms_Among_Transgender_and_Gender_Nonconforming_Adults>: "For those identifying as transgender or gender nonconforming (TGNC), the support of others can be instrumental in mitigating the challenges associated with cross-gender transition and identification. Social support and connectedness to the TGNC community can positively impact psychological well-being, facilitate resilience, and buffer against external stigmatization, prejudice, and discrimination (Frost & Meyer, 2012; Hendricks & Testa, 2012)...  For both trans male spectrum (TMS) and trans female spectrum (TFS) participants, general social support was significantly negatively associated with symptoms of anxiety and depression."

2. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6663089/>: "Findings suggest that TGNC people are exposed to a variety of social stressors, including stigma, discrimination, and bias events that contribute to mental health problems. Social support, community connectedness, and effective coping strategies appear beneficial."

## Sex Reassignment does not produce higher suicidality

What about the claims of institutions like the Heritage Foundation? Quoting from [one of their articles](https://www.heritage.org/gender/commentary/sex-reassignment-doesnt-work-here-the-evidence) on the subject (warning for those who want to read the article: insane amounts of transphobia and misgendering are contained within):

> When ‘the tumult and shouting dies,’ it proves not easy nor wise to live in a counterfeit sexual garb. The most thorough follow-up of sex-reassigned people—extending over 30 years and conducted in Sweden, where the culture is strongly supportive of the transgendered—documents their lifelong mental unrest. Ten to 15 years after surgical reassignment, the suicide rate of those who had undergone sex-reassignment surgery rose to 20 times that of comparable peers.

This is a massive distortion of the facts. All you would need to do to discover this would be to actually read [the study](https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0016885) the Heritage Foundation quotes: 

> **Participants**: All 324 sex-reassigned persons (191 male-to-females, 133 female-to-males) in Sweden, 1973–2003. Random population controls (10∶1) were matched by birth year and birth sex or reassigned (final) sex, respectively...
> **Results**: The overall mortality for sex-reassigned persons was higher during follow-up (aHR 2.8; 95% CI 1.8–4.3) **than for controls of the same birth sex**, particularly death from suicide (aHR 19.1; 95% CI 5.8–62.9). Sex-reassigned persons also had an increased risk for suicide attempts (aHR 4.9; 95% CI 2.9–8.5) and psychiatric inpatient care (aHR 2.8; 95% CI 2.0–3.9) [**than for controls of the same birth sex**]. Comparisons with controls matched on reassigned sex yielded similar results.

You see, the study doesn't actually say that the rates of suicide _rose_ after sex reassignment surgery! Just that they only measured those rates after sex reassignment. The mental health of the transgender people could have _already_ been that much worse than the general population, and based on what we know, that is probably the case, most probably due both to transphobia and the inherent difficulty of living with gender dysphoria. So based on that one study, we have absolutely no reason to think that sex reassignment caused those higher suicide rates. Moreover, sex reassignment did (as the other studies I quoted above also attest to) actually relieve some of the gender dysphoria that the patients felt, making them better off overall - just not as well off as the general population.

## Studies on trans gender bathroom issues

1. <https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs13178-018-0335-z>: "This study presents findings from matched pairs analyses of localities in Massachusetts with and without gender identity inclusive public accommodation nondiscrimination ordinances. Data come from public record requests of criminal incident reports related to assault, sex crimes, and voyeurism in public restrooms, locker rooms, and dressing rooms to measure safety and privacy violations in these spaces. This study finds that the passage of such laws is not related to the number or frequency of criminal incidents in these spaces. Additionally, the study finds that reports of privacy and safety violations in public restrooms, locker rooms, and changing rooms are exceedingly rare. This study provides evidence that fears of increased safety and privacy violations as a result of nondiscrimination laws are not empirically grounded."

2. <https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/inclusive-insight/202012/disgust-morality-and-the-transgender-bathroom-debate>: "sensitivity to pathogen disgust was positively associated with support for bathroom restrictions; sexual and injury disgust were unrelated. We also examined the role of disgust-driven moral concerns, known as purity concerns, as well as harm-related moral concerns in support for bathroom restrictions. While concerns about harm to cisgender and transgender people predicted support for bathroom restrictions, purity was a much stronger predictor. Also, purity partially mediated the link between pathogen disgust and support for bathroom restrictions, even after accounting for harm concerns. Findings and implications are discussed."

For more, see Julia Serano's article, ["Transgender People, Bahtrooms, and Sexual Predators: What the Data Say"](https://juliaserano.medium.com/transgender-people-bathrooms-and-sexual-predators-what-the-data-say-2f31ae2a7c06).

## Gender identity develops early

1. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1201664/>: "4 developmental levels of gender constancy were identified in 55 preschool-age children on the basis of a reproducible Guttman scale of answers to sets of questions pertaining to gender identity, gender stability over time, and gender consistency across situations. Children's developmental level of gender constancy was predictive of the amount and the proportion of time they attended to an adult male and an adult female film model. As boys developed gender constancy, their relative preference for watching the male model increased significantly; as girls developed gender constancy, their relative preference for watching the female model increased, though not significantly. At the more advanced levels of gender constancy, boys watched the male model more than did girls. It was suggested that same-sex social learning may develop as a function of children's cognitive understanding of gender as an identifiable, stable and consistent human attribute."
2. <https://embryo.asu.edu/pages/david-reimer-and-john-money-gender-reassignment-controversy-johnjoan-case>: "During childhood, Reimer was never told he was biologically male and regularly visited Money, who tracked the progress of his gender reassignment... Despite his upbringing, Reimer rejected the female identity as a young teenager and began living as a male. He suffered severe depression throughout his life, which culminated in his suicide at thirty-eight years old... Contrary to Money’s notes, Reimer reports that as a child he experienced severe gender dysphoria, a condition in which someone experiences distress as a result of their assigned gender. Reimer reported that he did not identify as a girl and resented Money’s visits for treatment. At the age of thirteen, Reimer threatened to commit suicide if his parents took him to Money on the next annual visit. Bullied by peers in school for his masculine traits, Reimer claimed that despite receiving female hormones, wearing dresses, and having his interests directed toward typically female norms, he always felt that he was a boy. In 1980, at the age of fifteen, Reimer’s father told him the truth about his birth and the subsequent procedures. Following that revelation, Reimer assumed a male identity, taking the first name David. By age twenty-one, Reimer had received testosterone therapy and surgeries to remove his breasts and reconstruct a penis. He married Jane Fontaine, a single mother of three, on 22 September 1990." **(it is not possible to just arbitrarily change someone's gender identity, even with extensive surgical and social interventions, people have an innate sense of their gender and won't be happy being forced out of it. This is a case of a cis person being forced to transition and experiencing what trans people experience every day when forced NOT to transition)**
3. <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7456919/> "The peer finding that interests us is the observation that, beginning in early childhood and continuing across the school-age years and into adolescence, girls and boys are more likely to associate with and like same-gender peers more than other-gender peers (Rubin et al., 2016)."
4. <https://www.healthychildren.org/English/ages-stages/gradeschool/Pages/Gender-Identity-and-Gender-Confusion-In-Children.aspx>: "Gender identity typically develops in stages:

    Around age two: Children become conscious of the physical differences between boys and girls.

    Before their third birthday: Most children can easily label themselves as either a boy or a girl.

    By age four: Most children have a stable sense of their gender identity."

## Social factors can change the frequency that you see seemingly innate things drastically

1. <https://leftyfretz.com/how-many-people-are-left-handed/#anchor-2>: "Even until recently, being left handed was still discouraged in many developed countries.

We can see this when we look at the number of lefties in different age groups in North America. Only 6% of over-65s identified as being left handed, whereas a whopping 15% of under 30s said the same."

