---
title: "Meme Theory and Religion"
author: "Philosopher's Apprentance (Guest Writer)"
---

## Introduction

Conservatively minded people often try to justify an institution, belief, or practice using evolutionary arguments. For example, they would look at something like religion and argue that since it has been around for so long it must be advantageous to humanity, otherwise it would not still be around. A variation of this argument goes like this: a good idea will lead to a more prosperous society, which will help the society spread it even further. These arguments rely on evolutionary misconceptions, however. My goal is to clear up some of these misconceptions, describe some of the ways that evolution works, and describe a theory that I think is more plausible in many of these situations: meme theory.

## What is meme theory?

In the book The Selfish Gene, which was published in 1976, Richard Dawkins defines a gene as a biological unit of information that can replicate itself. He goes on to address many misconceptions people have about evolution.

It's a very interesting book, and so are his other books. But the area I'm focusing on now is the last chapter of the Selfish Gene, where he coins the word meme. He defines meme as a cultural unit of selection that can replicate itself.

To him, there are three important criteria for evolution by natural selection to take place:

1. There must be reproduction of information from generation to generation.
2. There must be mutations to this information.
3. These changes / the content of this information should have some impact on the likelihood of reproduction.

Notice how biochemical encoding is not mentioned here. This is what leads him to conclude that some other encoding, such as in our brains or in a computer, could work.

In fact, throughout most of his book, he often talks about "replicators" rather than genes because he wants to focus on the function rather than the structure since biology often defies taxonomy.

Basically, whilst genes are encoded in DNA or RNA or some other biochemical structure, memes are encoded as neural patterns, and live in our brains. They can pass from person to person. He uses the example of a catchy song that makes someone want to sing it. If they sing it around other people, they also want to sing it, and so it spreads from person to person, with minor changes along the way.

But it doesn't have to be a song. It can be something else, like a religion, or an idea.

Dawkins says that the same forces of natural selection that apply to genes also apply to memes. And that they can often be better explanations for certain phenomena than biological advantage.

## The case for meme theory

In order to demonstrate meme theory in practise, I need to identify a concept that fulfils the 3 criteria for natural selection and can therefore be called a meme.

One example could be language. People mostly speak the same language as their parents. But not necessarily their biological parents. If an infant with Mandarin speaking biological parents was adopted by English speaking parents, they will speak English rather than Mandarin. Thus language reproduces.

Language also undergoes mutation.

English has changed since Chaucer. It's been about 30 generations since his writing. Each generation since then can communicate with the next and previous generation without too much difficulty, but it wouldn't be that easy for people 10 generations apart to communicate.

This is evidence that the meme-pool of ideas changes over time, i.e mutates.

Furthermore, the content/effect of those memes has an impact on it's reproductive success. New words crop up in slang all the time, but many of them are abandoned. Some of them make their way into dictionaries and regular usage. Words that are centred around technologies that are no longer in use themselves become unused.

This means that language fulfils all 3 criteria necessary for evolution by natural selection.

But there is no gene for the English language. The ability to speak it is not impacted by having English speaking biological parents. This makes it a meme, rather than a gene.

You can use meme theory to make predictions.

What do popular religions say about teaching children about the religion? How many of them say "wait until the child is an adult and able to make their own decisions before asking them what religion to believe in. Make sure you don't teach them your religion as a fact, instead tell them that it's your belief but you could be wrong"?

I'll wait. If a religion did that, it would not have many adherents. Even if you believe a religion is true, my point still stands for other religions. In fact, every major religion commands parents to teach their children about the religion so that they follow it.

Most major religions also command their adherents to have many children. "Go forth and multiply". Combined with indoctrinating children into the faith, this obviously has an impact on the number of future believers of the religion who go on to do the same thing with their own children. What do you think would happen if, instead, religion taught people to delay and minimise having children to ensure the best possible life, like a responsible person? You'd get one, maybe two children per believer, which is no competition for 5 children per religious believer.

What do major religions teach about interacting with non-believers? Being friends with them? Or even being in a relationship with them? If they don't outright prohibit it they clearly command reducing it to a minimum. What impact does it have? For most people, the plausibility of an idea depends on the proportion of people that they know who have that idea. And if they don't hear a competing idea, they are less likely to give up their original one.

Now how about this, how many popular religions ask for proselytising? Both Christianity and Islam do, Judaism doesn't. And Islam and Christianity have over a billion believers each, whilst Judaism has 14.7 million. Christianity and Islam are both offshoots of Judaism, with a few other differences, but I think this is telling.

If you agree with me so far we've established this: some ideas change over time because of their ability to propagate themselves.

## Objections to meme theory

There are a number of objections made to meme theory, but many of them would also apply to genes.

For example, one objection is the difficulty of identifying the physical medium where the memes are encoded. This would also apply to genes. Near the beginning of the Selfish Gene, Dawkins describes a few different physical representations that people point to when they talk about genes, and shows how biochemistry is too complicated to have a simple rule for what counts as a gene and what doesn't.

Instead of going by their structure, he decides to go by the function. If something is biologically encoded and functions as a gene, that's good enough. By functions as a gene, I mean it fulfils the three criteria mentioned above.

The next objection is that it's not amenable to scientific testing and is offered as just-so explanations. I don't see why this is the case. It's much easier to create a meme than a gene, making it easier to test in certain ways. People also often create just-so stories with genetic explanations. Meme theoretic explanations can also be used to make predictions and decide where to investigate.

Another objection is that a meme is just another word for concept. But that makes as much sense as saying that a gene is just another word for trait. Ok it makes more sense than that. But the point is that Dawkins's insight is that the forces of evolution by natural selection apply to concepts, and when he's talking about concepts in the context of natural selection, he uses the word meme.

## What evolutionary forces impact genes and memes?

So far I've covered why meme theory is not pseudo-science. To properly understand the implications, I need to explain some evolutionary forces and clear up some misconceptions.

### On group selection

One of the biggest misconceptions laymen have about evolution via natural selection is that the selection criteria is concerned with the good of the species.

This is not the case. Evolution doesn't work for the benefit of the species. It also doesn't work for the benefit of the individual. Although, if you assume that, you'll be less wrong than assuming it works for the benefit of the group. Evolution works for the benefit of the gene.

Imagine a gene that caused a member of a species to steal food from others. And imagine that this makes the individual less likely to starve and more likely to reproduce. This gene would spread. Even if it caused other members of the species to starve. And if this gene become widespread, the species can run out of food and die out.

But doesn't that mean only species where members don't steal from each-other remain? Isn't that the kind of higher-order selection I said didn't happen?

Well, no. And here's why. Species don't reproduce. Genes do. There aren't two versions of a species, one with a trait and one without, with the species with the trait going on to become more numerous. But there are individuals, some with a good gene and some without, and those with the gene are better able to increase the frequency of that gene.

As long as the species is not wiped out, where there is a tension between the gene becoming more prevalent and the society being better off, the gene will win. If it ends up killing the species it will, but if it doesn't then the gene will reproduce even if it leaves the species worse off.

This doesn't help the conservative argument. All that can be said is that the tradition doesn't make humanity extinct (or hasn't yet), which is a pretty low bar. It can screw other humanity as long as it perpetuates itself and doesn't wipe them out.

Richard Dawkins' main point in The Selfish Gene is that group selection is a faulty way of thinking about evolution, and that that gene selection can explain far more predictively when we would expect to see altruistic behaviour as a result of genes being shared by other individuals in the same species.

As J.B.S Haldane said: "I would lay my life for two brothers or 8 cousins."

The fact that altruism occurs is an expected consequence of gene-centred selection. The level of altruism and the recipients is also predicted by gene-centred selection and the way that genes are shared among individuals. This means that the organism-centred selection that Darwinism was implicitly operating under was also incorrect. It also means that the interests of the gene is sometimes aligned with more than just the individual with the particular copy of the gene, but other individuals with the same gene.

But it also shoots down the idea that evolution is a rosy species centred utilitarian. Individuals do have different interests, and these interests can and do overcome what the species centred utilitarian would prefer.

It's like the prisoner's dilemma: Although the average best outcome for everyone is if no-one betrays the other, every actor can improve their position by betrayal and so in a system where they cannot converse and plan, betrayal is the decision that will almost always be chosen.

If you start thinking of the replicator as helping itself, then you can also apply this to memes. The human host is just an environment the meme will try to exploit for the purpose of propagating itself.

### Local Optimum

Evolution does not make huge changes in a single generation. It makes small incremental changes each generation. If a change in one generation is worse than the previous generation, it will not prevail. But sometimes things have to get worse before they get better.

If you're improving a building, then you have to temporarily render at least a section of it unusable, making the building worse than it was before, so that you can make it even better. Evolution can't do this, so it's stuck with local optima.

Imagine you are near the peak of a hill. The peak is to your left. But to your right, after you go down a bit, is an even bigger hill. If you want the best possible outcome, you will go to the right. But if you don't want any step to leave you lower than you were one step before, you would go to the left.

The reason this is important is because as humans who can plan ahead and reason, we are not constrained towards having to follow local optima. Even if a tradition is good for the species, we can use our reason to do better.

### Explanation at another level

When teachers introduce programming for the first time, they often ask students to come up with a list of instructions for making something such as a cup of tea. The teacher then proceeds to follow the instructions the students have come up with in a comically literal fashion that even genies think is pedantic. The teacher would also ask what something means and require more detailed instructions.

For example, "how do I boil water", "how to I turn on the kettle", or turning on an empty kettle.

The point behind this is that evolution and our upbringing allows us to understand all that goes into making a cup of tea unconsciously and makes it feel simple. But a computer doesn't have this prior knowledge.

Evolution is similar. If you're making a gene to achieve a certain result, it has to occur through a series of lower level steps such that the release of certain chemicals at the right place and time inadvertently results in the eventual effect.

For example, instead of a gene in beavers that just says "make a better dam", it's more likely that a gene would result in a difference in size in beaver legs that leads them to swim at different depths and collect different kinds of branches. We can then look at all of these effects (longer legs, swimming at different depths, better dams), and decide which one is responsible for increased reproductive success.

Consider something like using Facebook or Twitter or whatever social media platform kids these days use. You can look at in in one of the following two ways:

1. People evolved to use Facebook. People that used it spread their genes more frequently than people that didn't.

2. People use Facebook because humans are social, humans are capable of language, and they are tool users. FaceBook fills their socialising fix. Being social, capable of language, having tool using abilities all contribute towards reproductive success.

I think the second one is often far more plausible. Because it's unlikely that genes can code for FaceBook directly, and because use of Facebook varies faster than human generations do.

The characteristics and behaviours of an organism is called its phenotype. This can be thought of as the effects of its genes and environment interplaying together.

Often there is a chain of causality from gene to phenotype, and all of these effects can have an impact on the reproductive success of the organism.

### Vestigial evolution

An evolutionary vestige is something that has lost all or most of the function it was initially evolved for. Sometimes it takes on a new function. Other times it has little to no function. If it has no cost to evolutionary fitness, there is no pressure to remove it, so it remains. There are about 180 vestigial organs in the human body, and the animal kingdom is full of it.

Here's an interesting one: goosebumps. There are homologous structures in apes that cause their hair to raise when they are scared so that they look larger and more intimidating. Since we're hairless apes, this doesn't do anything for us other than make us feel weird.

Maybe something was originally "good for the species", but isn't any more, and was copied because most people appeal to tradition rather than rationally evaluate things. Historically this has happened very frequently, and dropping these customs often resulted in increased prosperity.
Anthropological findings can often make strange seeming customs make sense for the context that they developed in. For example, in societies where men were killed in wars, there were far more women than men and so men married multiple women.

However, in a world where we don't have many men being killed in wars, it no longer makes sense.

### Parasites and arms races

A gene that successfully results in enabling the individual to navigate the environment that it is in and reproduce will spread.

What is meant by environment here? Anything external to the gene. That means other organisms, including the same species. That even includes other genes in the same organism.

In the same way that a cheetah that can run a little faster can catch a deer and live to reproduce, a baby bird that can make louder noises so its mother gives it more food. Or, a cuckoo can create an egg that looks more similar to a reed warbler's egg to better fool the warbler into raising cuckoo offspring.

This creates conflict. The deer wants to run faster to not get eaten by the cheetah. The parent does not want to give one child more food at the expense of the others. The warbler wants to spot cuckoo eggs better so they don't waste energy on birds that aren't their genetic offspring.

And so you end up with evolutionary arms races, which eventually result in very sophisticated phenotypes.

It's not good for the warbler to be tricked by the cuckoo. The warbler gets better and better at noticing cuckoo eggs. But cuckoos just get better at making eggs that looks like warbler eggs.

The same can be true of traditions that are harmful to people, but evolve to come to overcome defence mechanisms people deploy against them.

In fact, parasites often go quite deeply. They make use of existing infrastructure developed for the sake of the host organism, and pervert it towards the ends of the parasite.

Richard Dawkins often describes the individual organism as a machine made by the gene with the sole purpose of reproducing the gene. "Copy me by the roundabout way of creating an elephant with the reproductive capacity of creating another elephant".

More and more components are added to this machine as the generations pile on. This enables the body to respond in the correct way to inputs from the external environment to maximise reproductive success. For example, a central nervous system and other neural connections to move in the right way in response to certain electrical and chemical impulses.

Like a hacker, a parasite can tap into this pre-existing infrastructure by providing the right input in the right location to make the host do its bidding.

For example, a cell is a factory for creating more copies of the cell. It can take combine amino acids into another cell, and copies the nucleus into this. However, a virus can take over the cell, and take advantage of the existing machinery to make more copies of the virus instead.

In this way a meme can be viewed as analogous to foreign genetic material inside the human body that can make the body act differently. It does not necessarily have aligned interests with the human host, and can even subvert the person.

Note that this does not mean it will always be antagonistic. There are beneficial symbiotic relationships in nature. Chloroplasts and mitochondria merged together at one point in history. Mitochondria actual have their own separate genetic material, inherited through the maternal line. Dawkins goes into more detail regarding when a relationship is parasitic or symbiotic, with method of reproduction being one of the main criteria.

## Back to the argument

In summary, the first argument doesn't work because:

- Memes evolve at a different level than the host species, and they evolve to spread themselves, not spread the species
- Evolution does not occur for the benefit of the group
- Evolution only seeks local optima
- Conflicting interests exist
- There are things that used to have a useful evolutionary function but no longer do
- Other traits in the chain of causality between the gene and the outcome could be what is selected from

The second argument does not work for the following reasons:

- Truly popular ideas are common even, or perhaps especially, in non-prosperous societies. Take Religion for instance, religiosity is positively correlated with poverty. This should be obvious, whatever the most prosperous society does must by definition be uncommon. If the reason for prosperity was common, prosperity would also be common.
- In every society there are a multitude of ideas, and it takes a good statistician to identify which are the ideas that lead to prosperity and which didn't, which is very complex, and not helped by the fact that statistics is very unintuitive to most people. Most effects are pretty marginal, suffer a time-lag, and there is no review board to check whether a custom has worked before propagating it the next generation. Even if people are worse off, they can point to some other cause rather than the real cause, or they can even double down on the custom.
- What if the rational process of noticing that a tradition is harmful is part of the evolutionary process the proponent of this argument is extolling? "We shouldn't replace traditions because bad traditions get replaced with good ones" is a peculiar argument.

Now I will explain why I think that meme theory is often a better explanation than a genetic explanation in these cases, and why that will probably result in a different assessment.

## When to prefer meme theory?

If you've been convinced that meme theory is a thing, then when you see an institution or concept in human societies that aren't present in other species I think your priors should be roughly equal.

If it's something that has varied across different human societies, I think that this should increase the likelihood of meme theory. Especially if it's something that has changed within a generation. A meme can go through many more reproductive cycles in the same time-frame than a gene.

Gene theory requires a difference in the reproduction of the genes of the person with the gene. If there was a genetic explanation, you would expect to see this difference in reproductive success in people who hold it. But if there are people who don't hold it and have the same reproductive success, that indicates that it's probably not genetic.

## What can we do with meme theory

I think that some of the concepts I've built up here, and more concepts that apply to evolution, can be applied to meme theory.

For example, consider cults that train people to feel like brothers, and then sacrifice themselves and kill for the cult.

The group selection section I've outlined explains why it's good for a gene to sacrifice an individual for the right number of relatives. This often creates evolutionary pressure to detect relatives. A number of ways of doing this have been arrived at in different species. They range from innate knowledge, to imprinting, to learning. Humans use a mixture of different approaches. This makes humans malleable.

The army takes advantage of this. And cults do too. If you can teach people that someone who isn't their sibling is in fact their sibling, or should be viewed in the same way, you can leverage pre-existing functionality in humans that can even make them harm themselves. This is analogous to the way I've described how parasites can work when it comes to biological evolution.

I think that meme theory also gives a good explanation of how religion started off and got to where it is today.

Religion takes advantage of pre-existing infrastructure too. Human brains are fallible. Brains consume a lot of energy. And they often need to make choices with incomplete information. The way they prefer certain choices is biased. There are game theoretic reasons for this. If a human believes a sound is a tiger or some other creature, they are less likely to be killed. Even if it's just the wind. On the other hand, if they decide to wait and investigate, they are more likely to become tiger food.

If you combine this with the ability to detect faces and agency, then you end up with superstition.

And if you combine that with early human history, where humans were subject to many forces that they were not aware of, you can end up with humans describing these forces as agents. Eventually these agents become more and more detailed, as people build up the lore over generations. Even now people personify storms, so I don't think it's a stretch for people to do so when they did not have a scientific understanding of how the weather works.

When people would die it looked like a personality disappeared with seemingly no physical change, and in many societies the dead are considered to be spirits who can impact the living and can be appeased or angry.

It becomes convenient for people who want power over others to assert that they have a direct line to these powerful agents. And therefore the religions start to apply to all aspects of life. The religions that are best able to make people spread them (through the means that I mentioned earlier — indoctrination, lots of children, and proselytising) become more prominent.

Because modern communication and transport methods were not present then, these primitive religions have limited competition. Eventually, the popularity reaches a critical mass, and it becomes possible for large scale social policy designed to maximise the spread of the religion - such as punishing blasphemy.

Because the stakes are so high, people took it more seriously than they would take other things.

But unless people forget everything from previous generations and make absolutely no new discoveries, technology advances over time. One area of technology that has improved is faster transportation and advanced communication. This put people of other religions in contact more frequently. And after they stopped killing each other as much, religion had weakened it's stranglehold over society, because they had to tone it down to live together. And they were also exposed to more different ideas, which weakened the perceived plausibility of their religion.

Religions began to merge, as people copied appealing parts of other religions to make them more attractive. As scientific understanding increased, the number of forces that supernatural entities were used to explain decreased. At the same time, however, the "size" of the known world increased as knowledge about the world increased. As a result these supernatural entities became more and more powerful. This marks the transition from polytheism to mono-theism.

As science and technology advanced even further, the Enlightenment happened. At this point God had very few responsibilities. Many things claimed in religious scripture were contradicted by science, and religion was not as powerful as it used to be so it could not simply censor them. As a result theistic doctrines evolved to remain plausible. Everything that contradicted science became a metaphor! Never mind that people who devoted their lives to studying the scripture prior to the scientific discoveries never came to that conclusion. Instead of being a provincial God, now we have a domino pusher.

The Enlightenment meant that new memes faced a positive selection pressure for following good epistemology.

Modern religions are very different from how they were even a few hundred years ago. And although superstition still exists, it is not the same as religion. The conditions of widespread ignorance of the things that surround us that helped religion take root no longer do.

Most religious believers are raised into it rather than converts. And the number of people leaving religion is increasing. Even as religion is being watered down for modern sensibilities.

I think this memetic analysis of how religion began and developed as a response to a changing environment is a far more sober analysis than "humans that believe in the supernatural are better off". It allows us to rationally evaluate religious edicts for positive and negative effects rather than blindly assuming that is must be socially good.

I'm not writing this to pick on religion. But writing about memes without mentioning religion is like writing about 20th Century European history without mentioning the World Wars.

## How should we approach institutions?

Rationally. We should try to find the causal mechanisms that underlie various institutions when it comes to deciding whether to keep them. We should look for historical precedence. We should keep an eye out for features of culture that seem to harm people but aid their own spreading.
