---
title: "Am I Afraid of Religion? Yes."
---

## Arguments, Credences, and Priors

I saw an interesting video title for an interview from Thomas Nagel, a dualist philosopher who I believe is religious at least to some degree, although I'm not sure. Basically, it was asking whether atheists are actually afraid of religion, and it occurred to me that there's actually an interesting question in that. From the position of being fairly convinced that a belief is unjustified or wrong, what is the natural attitude that one has toward that incorrect belief? Generally, if one has even relatively high priors against such a belief and a low credence in that belief being true, one can be and is generally skeptical of any arguments made in favor of that belief whether or not they might seem convincing on the face of things. This is why we are generally driven to inspect philosophical arguments and proposed evidence for positions that we do not currently hold quite carefully, as there is always a chance that the intuitive appearance of validity and soundness can be mere illusions, and if your priors are low and your credence is low for the belief, then there's a higher chance that the argument will in fact turn out to be illusory.

## Fear of Tricks

This could easily be framed as a fear of religion, but not other beliefs, in that generally speaking if you have no particularly high priors against a belief, you are not going to approach its arguments with as much skepticism, nor will you be as concerned that even if an argument appears correct at first blush, it might be hiding some trick or fallacy that you are simply missing.

For instance, I generally go into apologetic arguments expecting there to be some serious problem or some trick going on in the argument, and when I don't immediately see it I grow concerned because it's quite easy to slip these things past an initial analysis of the argument, and so I have to ramp up my skepticism in order to find it. I think this is a valid approach though, if your priors and credences are set on something that is objective and sensible and reasonable instead of just set randomly or based on faith or hope or desire. I should also note here that In the case of religious arguments, it has turned out so many times in the past that the arguments were based on illusions, lies, or fallacies, that my priors directly for the apologetic arguments being illusory or fallacious are extremely high, besides the priors that the belief the argument is ostensibly supporting will be correct in the first place being low.

## Fear of Memetic Hazard

There's another layer to this, too: religion in particular is one of those things that has a lot of memetic power. Even proponents of religion will often admit this, such as followers of Jordan Peterson talking about the mythic strength and symbolic importance of many of the stories of the Bible. And things that have memetic power like that, that are developed culturally through a form of cultural natural selection in order to propagate themselves and maintain control over people as much as possible, otherwise they would not have survived this long, are things that are very dangerous to let into your head in the first place, because they can often override one's reasoning capabilities. Often times, in fact, they are designed to do so. As such, even if you are confident that something is untrue, it can be dangerous to consider it seriously. It's like purposefully getting oneself sick with poison because you know that the antidote is close at hand: you don't know exactly what the effects of the poison will be, and it might prevent you from even using the antidote. You even see this with non-religious things to a smaller degree, such as with Roko's Basilisk.

This is not to mention the fact that religions generally seem to be an all-consuming thing that forces you to build your identity around them and essentially takes over your life and conforms it to something other than what your individual life would be otherwise. They are essentially a system for generating people that all act, think, talk and interact in the same ways, almost like the Borg. If they were true, that would still be concerning, and since there are significant doubts about whether they are actually true, it's even more concerning.
