---
title: A Short Criticism of Solipsistic Skepticism
---
My own views on solipsistic skepticism, besides the point that it is incredibly unpragmatic to hold that view and completely useless in almost any way that one could define "use", is that solipsistic skepticism could never be falsified, since it could be adapted to fit any evidence of the reason or senses that could be given. By the same token, since it can be adapted to fit everything, then it predicts everything, and by extension it predicts nothing, because it predicts nothing over anything else. Therefore, nothing could ever be considered as evidence for solipsistic skepticism. Thus the question becomes: should we take seriously something which is merely a logical possibility, but for which there *can be* no argument or evidence? I think the answer is no. We don't do that for anything else, even in philosophy. Otherwise we would have to treat as entirely equal all propositions which are not necessarily true, regardless of any arguments or evidence given for any of them. On the other hand, if we take a reason and senses as evidence, and attempt to construct a hypothesis which actually predicts some things and not others, and in particular predicts what we do see and does not predict what we do not see from our senses and reason, then we can count what we see and what appears to us reasonable as evidence for that hypothesis, giving it much greater certainty than that of solipsistic skepticism. And the hypothesis that does the best in predicting what we see, is that of there being an external world, as all appearances seem to indicate.
