---
tags: ["epistemology", "religion", "atheism", "presuppositions"]
title: "Foundationalism and Presuppositionalism"
---

I recently came across a proto-presuppositional statement, quoted in a video I was listening to, and it made me want to restate my general issues with presuppositional apologetics as an approach. Here's the quote:

> "In such a circumstance, Lewis insists, the naturalist cannot legitimately
> *presuppose* the validity of inference in the process of attempting to *establish* this validity in order to remove the reasonable doubts that have been raised about it. To do so would be to be the question against the theist (whose position does not lead to doubts about the validity of reasoning)."
> — Victor Reppert, *The Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology*

## Two Problems With Proto-Presuppositionalism

The first problem with this point is that it is preposterous to say that no doubts concerning the validity of reasoning can arise if one is a theist. Even if the theistic worldview naturally allays all doubts concerning the validity of reasoning immediately as a direct inferential result (which is not at all obvious), no one automatically knows all the corollaries of their beliefs until they reason them out. This means that a theist can justifiably have absolutely no doubts about the validity of reasoning only after they've used reasoning to determine that their belief in theism naturally allays those doubts, which puts them in the same position as the naturalist: both naturally has doubts about the validity of reasoning, and both must to do reasoning in order to come to the conclusion that they shouldn't have that doubt (or should ignore it).

The second problem is more serious, I think. Not only can this challenge be thrown back in the theist's face by asking *them* to justify the validity of reasoning without using it, but it essentially asks for something that is definitionally impossible: it asks someone to provide a justification (by which the presuppositionalist means rational reasons), for something *without using rationality* on pain of begging the question. In essence the presuppositionalist is here asking the naturalist to provide reasons and logic without using reasons and logic. It's like asking someone to build you a car without using any of the components necessary to construct a car, and then saying they're a worse engineer than you because they can't do that. Justifying the basic presuppositions needed to reason in the first place is always going to be inherently circular for anyone doing it no matter what metaphysical nonsense they appeal to, because they constitute the requirements of justification in the first place.

Worse, in the case of trying to fix an epistemic problem by appealing to something outside the mind, one is assuming one has the epistemic ability to know that that thing actually does exist, and therefore assuming one's ability to have correct epistemology, in order to solve the problem. Thus, positing a god that can solve our epistemic doubts doesn't help one bit, because the very fact that we have those doubts means that whatever method we used to conclude that there must be a god, whatever method we use to arrive at an understanding of what having that god implies, and whatever method we used to arrive at an understand of that god, all being epistemic methods, are the very things that are in doubt. This is why, for instance, positing direct revelation doesn't help anything at all: one could be just as mistaken about the metaphysical import and truth of what one's *sensus divinitatis* tells you (if you even have such a sense, which is not obvious) as the metaphysical import and truth of what one's *sensus logicae* or plain old senses tell you (senses that we self-evidently possess, whether they are valid or not). Furthermore, if the theist is allowed to say that epistemology is incoherent without assuming something that guarantees (in their minds, although I contest this) the general accuracy of their senses and their reasoning, why could not an atheist appeal to the same principle to posit the much simpler and less dubious idea that logic and our senses are just *necessarily* by-default accurate?

Hence the best strategy is not to attempt such a justification, but instead to admit that these things are performatively basic — implied and required in any thoughts or reasoning or meaningful existence — document that they are so, try to slim down the list of presuppositions as much as you can, and then move on. This is what I do in my philosophical summary, which you can find in the **About** page.

## A Meta-Discussion About Tactics

This is why I think this kind of move is particularly slimy, and I think the people that use it are aware of it too. They are asking other people to achieve a standard that is literally definitionally impossible, one under which they could and would never identify the standard as satisfied, and when people admit a failure, they claim victory by simply asserting that their position doesn't share that problem. I think it's interesting that this argument on C.S. Lewis's part is brought up particularly in the context of an argument that he was unable to defend properly in the face of actual academic philosophy, an argument which his failure to defend allegedly changed his approach to apologetics in general. I think that indicates that this argument was a last-ditch attempt to save his position. Which is actually true of all presuppositional apologetics: there's a great quote from Cornelius Van Til that I have since lost track of (although I'm sure I could find it again), where he basically says that presuppositional apologetics is a last-ditch style of apologetics or a fall-back position because evidentialist apologetics doesn't work.

I think the only reason people don't notice that this is the game the presuppositionalist is playing is because the presuppositionalist purposefully equivocates on the words explanation and justification: they first say that some worldview is invalid because it cannot **explain** reasoning, which is sort of reasonable, and so they ask for an **explanation** from the naturalist (while of course merely asserting that their worldview has one). This is the "argument from reason." Then, when they realize that the naturalist *can* provide an explanation, or the naturalist points out that they don't necessarily have to provide one in order to be reasonable, as long as it cannot be demonstrated that there absolutely cannot be an explanation, the presuppositionalist switches to asking for a justification, which is definitely impossible but similar enough to the idea of an explanation that people often won't notice the bait and switch. This is often because justifications are often provided when someone asks for an explanation and vice versa and the words are often colloquially used interchangeably. Furthermore, interestingly, when one is providing an *account* or *explanation* for how something is possible or why something exists, instead of a justification for why it should be trustworthy or an argument *that* it exists, it is not merely valid but *required* to assume that the thing one is trying to explain exists, that's the whole reason you're providing an explanation in the first place!

