---
title: "The Two Kinds of Pragmatism"
published: true
tags: ["epistemology"]
---

**Author's Note**: I originally voice-dictated this essay off the cuff, and only later (Febuary 2nd, 2022) came back and edited it into the form you see it now, as part of a project of going back and either deleting my old voice-dictated blog posts, or raising them to the standards of my newer pieces.

## 1

I recently listened to the chapter on William James from Bertrand Russell's *A History of Western Philosophy*, and it's prompted me to consider exactly where [my theory of pragmatism](https://blog.alexisdumas.org/2022/01/03/fuzzy-logic.html), insofar as my epistemology is adjacent to pragmatism, differs from the pragmatism of William James. This is especially important to investigate considering the fact that William James is considered to be the paradigmatic case of pragmatic philosophy, so if you're going to call yourself a pragmatist you either need to agree with him on most major issues, or have a very clear and distinct understanding of where you differ from him. Since there are some very significant differences between my views and James's, I think it will be a useful clarification exercise to outline where those differences lie.

Moreover, I think that where my approach to pragmatic epistemology and philosophy differs from William James's gets at the heart of both the fundamental difference between how I approach philosophy and how other philosophers do. As such, I think working through how my pragmatism is unique might actually serve as a good, gentle introduction to both my epistemology and my philosophical thought in general.

## 2

I think the fundamental point of difference is that for William James, a belief is true *if and only if it makes you happier*, for any reason whatsoever. For him, the only relevant criteria for truth whatsoever is the direct effect that holding a belief has on your mental and emotional state. If a belief makes you better satisfied with life, more stable in your mind, etc, then it is true, and that is the end of the discussion.

For me, however, it's slightly different: in my estimation, a belief is true of something if and only if it is a description of some conceivable object of experience, which can explain or account for all of the past appearances of an object, and predict and explain all of the future appearances and changes in that object, while using the minimum amount of assumptions to do so. This, at least, is the core of my approach to truth, although there are many other complications.

Where does the pragmatism come into my philosophy at all, then? This seems more like a sub-type of the verification or correspondence theories of truth! Where the pragmatism comes in for me is not in my definition of truth *per se*, but in my explanation of why this definition is, first, relevant and, second, necessary.

Concerning relevance, the argument goes like this: since we can only ever interact with how an object appears to us, the only relevant way in which we could establish that something is true of an object is through the experiences that the object gives to us. It makes no sense to define truth in relation to something that we could never know, such as being an accurate description of the actuality of something in some ontological sense, since we could never possibly have real access to that. It is impossible for us to step outside of ourselves and objectively compare the propositions held within our own minds with what Kant called the nouminal world. Therefore, what is relevant to any definition of truth designed for humans and not built around theology is phenomena — i.e., experience.

The point about necessity builds on this insight. What do we care about when we're talking about phenomena? Primarily, we care about actionable information — information that can be used to make our lives better; and the only kind of information that is actionable is *predictive* information. Predictive information is what allows us to know what to prepare for, how to act, where to go, all the things necessary for life. If knowledge does not contain within it some sort of prediction, and specifically a prediction about experience, it means nothing to me. I believe that his is generally true, too. Humans care about truth because it helps us achieve our desires by giving us the ability to predict the world around us, both in what it will do to us if we do not act and in what it will do or how it will react to our own actions. We ultimately only care about the desires that are built into us; truth matters to us because it can make us act more effectively, which in turn can us happier.

## 3

Thus, the pragmatism of my philosophy enters it because I am primarily interested in the ways in which a belief changes the *practical* aspects of my life: how that belief should change my expectations regarding experiences, and in turn my practices with regards to its subject. This is the point at which my epistemology becomes most similar to that of James. To quote him from [*Pragmatism: A New Name For Some Old Ways Of Thinking*](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/5116/5116-h/5116-h.htm):

> The pragmatic method is primarily a method of settling metaphysical disputes that otherwise might be interminable. Is the world one or many?—fated or free?—material or spiritual?—here are notions either of which may or may not hold good of the world; and disputes over such notions are unending. The pragmatic method in such cases is to try to interpret each notion by tracing its respective practical consequences. What difference would it practically make to anyone if this notion rather than that notion were true? If no practical difference whatever can be traced, then the alternatives mean practically the same thing, and all dispute is idle.      Whenever a dispute is serious, we ought to be able to show some practical difference that must follow from one side or the other's being right.

The crucial difference, however, is that while for me the definition and motivation of truth is *grounded* in happiness, for him, truth is directly defined *in terms of* happiness:

> Now pragmatism, devoted tho she be to facts, has no such materialistic bias as ordinary empiricism labors under. Moreover, she has no objection whatever to the realizing of abstractions, so long as you get about among      particulars with their aid and they actually carry you somewhere. Interested in no conclusions but those which our minds and our experiences work out together, she has no a priori prejudices against theology. IF THEOLOGICAL IDEAS PROVE TO HAVE A VALUE FOR CONCRETE LIFE, THEY WILL BE TRUE, FOR PRAGMATISM, IN THE SENSE OF BEING GOOD FOR SO MUCH. FOR HOW MUCH MORE THEY ARE TRUE, WILL DEPEND ENTIRELY ON THEIR RELATIONS TO THE OTHER TRUTHS THAT ALSO HAVE TO BE ACKNOWLEDGED.  
>
> What I said just now about the Absolute of transcendental idealism is a case in point. First, I called it majestic and said it yielded religious      comfort to a class of minds, and then I accused it of remoteness and sterility. But so far as it affords such comfort, it surely is not sterile; it has that amount of value; it performs a concrete function. As a good pragmatist, I myself ought to call the Absolute true 'in so far forth,' then; and I unhesitatingly now do so.
>
> But what does TRUE IN SO FAR FORTH mean in this case? To answer, we need only apply the pragmatic method. What do believers in the Absolute mean by saying that their belief affords them comfort? They mean that since in the      Absolute finite evil is 'overruled' already, we may, therefore, whenever we wish, treat the temporal as if it were potentially the eternal, be sure that we can trust its outcome, and, without sin, dismiss our fear and drop      the worry of our finite responsibility...
>
> If the Absolute means this, and means no more than this, who can possibly deny the truth of it? To deny it would be to insist that men should never relax, and that holidays are never in order. I am well aware how odd it      must seem to some of you to hear me say that an idea is 'true' so long as to believe it is profitable to our lives. That it is GOOD, for as much as it profits, you will gladly admit.

For me, truth is one means among many to achieve happiness — in my opinion the most reliable one — whereas for him, happiness is truth, the two are purely interchangeable. For me, happiness defines the parameters of what discussions are interesting to me; for him, happiness defines everything. In the course of the essay of his I reference above, he adds a number of provisos and exceptions to that, saying that a belief that directly makes you happy is good, and therefore true, only insofar as it doesn't clash with other, more vital goods and/or beliefs, but the core of his proposition is that if a belief makes you happy, as long as it doesn't obviously clash with anything else, it is true for you. Now, even under this rubric most superstitious and theistic beliefs would be ruled out, but that's beside the point. It is impossible to judge the consequences of randomly accepting a belief that is nice to think about beforehand, so doing so on a case-by-case basis is extremely risky and dubious; I think it is by far the better solution to build in some safeguards into our epistemology to account for this.

## 4

There are reasons not to adopt beliefs purely because they make us happy to hold them, though. While a true belief, one which accurately describes our phenomenal world, is guaranteed to ensure that we are able to successfully imprint our desires on the world and prepare ourselves for the world, as my definition of truth is based on having perfect predictive and explanatory power over all of the range of data past and future that could be had about a thing, a belief which simply makes me feel happy directly can make no such promises. In other words, while my definition of truth takes into account falsity risk (the risk of being wrong, calculated in terms of the chance that a belief is wrong multiplied by the magnitude of the cost if it is), by only asking you to believe something to the degree that it has proven to be useful in the past, James's definition is much more reckless: it completely disregards everything about a belief except its momentary, internal, pleasures.

A belief could turn out to be harmless, it could even turn out to be true, but until I have actually done the reasoning to assess that, I am essentially playing epistemological Russian roulette, choosing a belief that could make me less able to enact my desires, which are ultimately all that I care about, and therefore risking all that I care about, because it gives me a direct burst of happiness that I might not even find necessary to hold on to.

Of course, it is not necessarily possible to come to perfectly true beliefs in the sense that I have defined, but it is certainly possible to assess the relative truth of various beliefs, and continually seek to make our beliefs more true. For under my definition, truth is not something that is either non-existent or complete and entire. Because it is based on the ability to predict and explain and describe, there can be degrees of truth because things can be more accurately or less accurately described, more accurately or less accurately explained, or more accurately and less accurately predicted. Furthermore, a theory could predict, explain, or describe more or less of the phenomenal world.

Therefore, even in a situation, like our actual situation, we're only partial truths are possible, pursuing truth insurers that we will be able to satisfy our desires more and more accurately as our beliefs become more and more true, whereas accepting a belief that we are not sure of the truth of, because it satisfies one desire, comes with the very high risk of sacrificing many of our other desires for a single desire.

This is doubly a bad bargain, too, because while you can learn how to live with thinking something is true, learn to live with or without a certain belief, because the interior world of the mind is malleable and adaptive, the external world is not so forgiving. Choosing a belief that goes against it will simply run you up against the hard brick wall of reality, no do-overs, no accommodation. So choosing an epistemology that privileges the internal psychological desire-satisfaction a belief grants you over external desire-satisfaction is choosing to appease the flexible constraint before the constant constraint — a *mathematically* wrong choice.

Additionally, if we accept a belief regardless of its truth value, in spite of or even without any investigation into that possible truth value, then we stop our search before it's even begun. We sacrifice our ability to be able to improve the desire-satisfaction capabilities of our beliefs. Meanwhile, if we continually search for true beliefs and update our beliefs when new evidence is given to us from the phenomenal world, although we run a risk, it is a risk that diminishes, because our beliefs will become better and better and we will therefore become better and better at achieving our desires. 

It is the difference between choosing to play the lottery once and never work at all whether you win or lose, or choosing to work for a long time to gain more money so that one can do more things. In the one case, you risk either hitting the jackpot and being able to achieve all of your desires immediately, or (much more probably) winning nothing and starving to death. Whereas in the second case, you are guaranteed to be able to act on some of your desires immediately and you will also have a growing and improving ability to act on your desires over time. You are guaranteed to improve over time and you might even achieve what you would could have achieved randomly by the luck of the draw in the first situation.

## 5

To summarize: while my epistemology uses pragmatism to define its terms and limit its scope, but has other theoretical mechanisms to ensure and balance the different ways in which beliefs can be useful, James's direct pragmatism simply defines everything in terms of happiness and leaves it at that, which leaves it open to several severe epistemic risks and problems. In light of this, while I remain committed to using the term 'pragmatism' because I think it encapsulates an important component of my philosophy, I think my approach is not only relevantly different from James's, but also superior.
