---
published: true
title: Abiogenesis Back Of the Napkin Calculations
---
> Although the chosen values are spectacularly approximate, the linear nature of the equation ensures that variations in any factors by even a few orders of magnitude do little to alter the basic outcome. In the scenarios considered, the abiogenesis probability per unit time per set of building blocks is found to range from Pa∼10−36Pa∼10−36 to Pa∼10−30Pa∼10−30, with a value of Pa<10−33Pa<10−33 being broadly compatible with the specific case of the Earth. Thus, in this case, Eq. 1 indicates that a very small assembly probability per unit time could in principle be compensated for by the large scale of a planetary “search engine” —readily producing at least one abiogenesis event within a geologically appropriate timespan. ([1](https://www.pnas.org/content/113/29/8127 "citation 1"))

My own back of the napkin calculations based on their results indicate that the probability of life arising naturally in the observable universe is **2%**. This is factoring in the number of Earthlike planets in the galaxy (40 billion [2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth_analog)), the number of galaxies in the observable universe (about 125 billion is the smallest modern estimate [3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galaxy)), and the number of years before the first proto-cells likely emerged on Earth (about 4 billion years).

However, that assumes that the unit time for the equation for the study is in years, which I find extremely unlikely, since that implied that it takes a year for a few hundred molecules to bond (427 DNA molecules make up the smallest modern cell, but it could be significantly less since we don't know what a about 32% of that genome does), whereas I think molecule bonding is relatively instantaneous. Remember, the probability of a particular bond happening is what the equation from the study already factors in, so we'd just need to factor in a timescale. A more reasonable but still stingy estimation of a day leads to a probability of 730% of life emerging in the observable universe alone, and as the study points out in the conclusion, they didn't count the idea that there might be other building blocks of life, which increases the probability even further.

Of course, the equation they used also doesn't take into account a few variables that might make abiogenesis less likely, but as long as it doesn't make it 7.3 times less likely (which it probably won't if I had to venture a very uneducated guess), then the probability of life naturally arising in our observable universe alone is literally 100%.

Even if it was less than that though, my Bayesian priors in supernatural events occuring are so low, and the existence of a classically theistic God predicts so many outcomes (and so predicts each individual thing with less certainty) and also predicts a universe we don't see so much more strongly than the one we do, that I think it's totally reasonable to accept abiogenesis over a supernatural/theistic account for the origin of life.