---
title: Going Back to School
---

## 1

It's New Year's Eve. I'm sitting on the couch, sunlight falling in slanted lines across my legs, browsing on my phone. My right eyelid is twitching constantly, and it's extremely distracting. It's been doing it since yesterday morning; I think it's the stress. You see, that first sentence only describes what my body has been doing. The crucial part, the part that's generating the stress, is what's going on inside my head.

I'm scared.

Probably way more scared than I should be, but that just comes with the territory when you've got an anxiety disorder. I'm going back to campus in six days. In six days, I'm going to have to get up at 4 o'clock in the morning, Uber to San Francisco, and embark on an eight hour series of flights to the other side of the United States. That's actually not what I'm scared of, but it sure as shit doesn't help.

In eight days, the school semester starts. Although my headaches are far, far better than they've been, they're certainly not gone, and what might be worse, I took the last semester off, so I'm out of practice buckling down and working on assignments, taking notes, etc. That's not what I'm scared of, either, though.

No, I'm scared of two other things: the loneliness, and losing my new-found self. The first fear makes all-too-much sense; the second one makes no sense at all.

## 2

Last time I was on campus, I was extremely lonely. Yes, I was a member of three clubs that met regularly, a D&D group, and E House. Yes, I went to classes in person and chatted with the people there. Yes, I had a room-mate. But there's a distinct difference between seeing human faces regularly, and actually knowing people. I think everyone who's grown up in a city knows what I mean — it's unnervingly easy to be *completely alone* even in a sea of faces, and it's even possible to be that alone among a group of people who you see repeatedly. There's some kind of strange, diaphanous membrane that wraps you like cellophane when this happens: you can touch others, hear them, speak to them, but you can't *touch* them, *hear* them, or *speak* to them.

It's a barrier that I've never really learned to cross in the real world. Online, I have a slightly easier time making friends that I don't feel this disconnection from. People who I share real emotional bonds with, call regularly, talk even more often with, share my interests with. But even then, it's a tough process. And in the meantime, I feel *alone.*

Isolated.

On campus last time, this isolation slowly began to wear me down. I didn't realize it at the time, but looking back that was an incredibly painful experience. I floated back and forth between classes like a spirit unable to find its final resting place. Lost, alone, not knowing it was dead yet.

I don't want to feel this pain again. I still feel it, but in a way it helps to have my dad around, and on top of that at least there's nobody around besides him to really remind me of my inner isolation. I know if I go back to campus, it will hurt worse if I don't do something different. But what? For the life of me, I don't know the answer.

My first thought was clubs — find a group of people who are not just interested in the same things I am, but who are *like me.* Don't think so much about choosing clubs for academic purposes this time, choose them for social ones, right? And now that I've realized I'm a member of the LGBTQ+ community, that should be easier, since even if there aren't clubs for cishet white men to meet and socialize, surely something like that must exist for minority groups? No such luck, though. Clubs at Penn State are almost bizarrely focused on academic pursuits. That's not really surprising, based on what I've seen before, but still, that leaves me with no real plan.

So I'm afraid I'll end up isolated again.

## 3

My second, equally immediate and frightening fear is that I'll lose myself, lose *Alexis*, when I go back. It's a fear that keeps recurring: what if, when I go back to doing this thing that I used to do before I got my concussion and then subsequently found myself, I'll lose the new version of myself that I uncovered? What if I'll go lose this colorful, hopeful, beautiful new vista of identity that I worked so hard to uncover, this (metaphorical) land of uncertainty? What if I go back to being the pervasive vague unease, disquiet, and dissatisfaction that permeated my life before now? The varying stages of disassociation and depersonalization that I unconsciously found (and still find) refuge in to get away from those feelings?

What if I lose Alexis?

That won't happen. I know it won't happen. The very fact of my fear and unease about this happening is what *proves* it won't, in a sense. But yet it terrifies me. I felt this fear about returning to writing a lot regularly too — still feel it a little, in fact — and although my fear was proven unfounded, somehow it is springing up again anew.

This fear is tied to something else that's been happening lately that scares me, even though it isn't related to going back to college: what I've been calling "Man Moments." Moments when I actually like how I look as a man, conceptualizing myself as one, etc. They're not predicated on my masculinity, exactly, and they're much rarer than the days when I have dysphoria over being a man, but it's still strange and a little concerning, and I worry that this might be a sign that I'm not really a girl, or shouldn't transition, or something, even though I really want to be a girl and transition. In fact, just yesterday, I got so excited at the idea that I might have breast buds soon from HRT that I got giddy!

Imagining hypotheticals really isn't helping here either. At this point I've pretty much spent all the time that is useful laying back and trying to picture what it'll be like post-transition, and because it's not real and I've trod that mental path so many times, my brain is kind of numb to it.

That's it. No conclusion, nothin. I just needed to vent a little.