---
title: "Two Principles of Anarchism"
toc: true
tags: ["ethics", "anarchism", "mutualism"]
---


> “A man ought to be a friend to his friend and repay gift with gift. People should meet smiles with smiles and lies with treachery.” — *Edda*, 13<sup>th</sup> century

## 1. Introduction

There are two principles, which, when followed, bring the best results for each individual, and also form the basis for a society which benefits all who are members thereof. The first is **autonomy**: each individual must value for themselves as free a range of choice and action for their own lives and labor as possible, and must abhor domination, oppression, and authority. The second is **reciprocity**: each individual cooperating with all the others in expectation of like consideration for themselves, responding to cooperation with cooperation, and responding to a breach of this expectation with the cessation of cooperation, so that all are motivated to engage in mutually beneficial interactions.

If society follows these as general principles, and treats a violation of positive reciprocity on the part one of its members as a violation to all of them, then one can expect to find a society in which it is most pleasing to live, as each interaction leaves both sides better off than before, and no one accepts subjugation of themselves, nor attempts to subjugate others. Every person gives a little of their autonomy, in choosing not to dominate others, in return for similar (and much greater because of the difference in number) consideration on the part of all others, while not really losing much, since autonomy as it is exercised in the domination of others is far less important than autonomy in one's own labor and life choices.

In this treatise, I will attempt to demonstrate that adhering to an ethic centered around autonomy and reciprocity, as well as promoting it in others, is in the interest, not just of the society as a whole, but also the individual as well. Therefore, I will present this as advice to the shrewd reader, who wishes to live in harmony with their neighbors and in a society which is most beneficial to them; the moral force of this 'ethic' therefore lies not in some external or objective moral imposition, but in the common interests of all human beings.

## 2. The Value of Autonomy

**Autonomy** is the ability to freely choose how to live your own life, spend your own time, and dispose of your own labor. Some call this ability 'liberty,' or 'freedom,' but I prefer autonomy because it emphasizes that the individual is the captain of their own ship, controlling their own destiny separate from, but not in tension with, all others. The words freedom and liberty implies the lack of all boundaries, whereas autonomy has boundaries: the boundaries of an individual's own life and time. 

If reciprocity is the principle which will safeguard mutual benefit and mutual respect, autonomy is the primary benefit the respect of which reciprocity must safeguard, because autonomy is the chief value of the clear-thinking individual. If one is to pursue any value whatsoever, one must first have the freedom to do so: the freedom to use one's own reasoning mind to choose what to do with one's time and one's body. If someone is subordinated to another they cannot be free to exercise their own mind and choice, and therefore cannot achieve any value of their own except at the sufferance of another, whose interests necessarily cannot be trusted to align with their own.

Not only this, but autonomy is a crucial component of human life. In the absence of it, whatever actions that the individual takes, because they are made at the command, and therefore ultimately the decision, of another, for which the individual is not responsible, can have little joy for them, since it did not flow from them. Whatever they produce is not theirs, and their very time and life is not theirs to enjoy, is separated from them and made a kind of extension of another's time and life in a kind of waking death. If life is good, subordination to another is evil for the very same reasons. Worse, when subordinated to another one is not free to build one's own character as a human being, choose what to become. Instead, another person decides who you are, and you have little say in it, and so you become alienated from what you are. A slave who does whatever their owner commands because they need food is a person who becomes whoever their owner tells them to be, independent of anything actually stemming from them, and so becomes self-alienated.

Indeed, living too long under the subordination of others will atrophy an individual's capacity to make choices at all. What is unique to them slowly rots away from disuse, until they are dependent on their masters for everything. A person like this, even given their freedom, will not know what to do with it. We see this in those around us, and in ourselves, all the time: we do as teachers, priests, officials, or bosses tell us continuously, until the majority of our lives is consumed by being what other people want us to be, so that we become passive servants in our souls. Often, we do not remember how to learn something on our own, to produce on our own, to become our own person, to think on our own.

Autonomy also seems to be a core component of human flourishing for more intrinsic reasons: we have brains, can reason and make plans and choices for ourselves, and we are rewarded in mental health, satisfaction, and more for exercising that capacity, just as we are rewarded for exercising any capacity. Autonomy, self-determination, and the ability to self-actualize are key to psychological happiness[^1] [^37] [^38]. To become a full, well-rounded human being is not just some teleological end goal imposed upon us from the outside, but is also something that we can feel inside: there are rewards for becoming fully oneself, becoming fully human, exercising those capacities that make us so.

[^1]: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0146167200266002?journalCode=pspc
[^37]: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/1359432X.2021.1972973
[^38]: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Happiness-is-everything%2C-or-is-it-Explorations-on-Ryff/0b7cbc0e7b5946b39778784a2167019eebd53e52

## 3. Reciprocity

Reciprocity, both in the community and in the individual, is what will safeguard  individual autonomy. Communities are composed of individuals, and therefore our first task is to explore how it is in the interest of the individual to engage in reciprocal respect of the interests and autonomy of others. Once that is established, we can speak about how a community of people who understand this common interest can operate.

### 3.1. Positive and Negative Reciprocity

If one respects the autonomy of others, and interacts with them in a positive way, one is much more likely to be able to convince those others to respect one's own autonomy, and to interact with oneself in mutually beneficial and positive ways. There are two reasons for this.

First, because if you make it clear that you are treating other people positively in expectation of a return of that positive treatment, then they are incentivized to return it, in order to continue your positive treatment of them. If you do not return the positive cooperation I offer you, then reciprocity is broken, and I will cease to cooperate with you as well, ceasing to respect your autonomy and to give benefits to you when you do not respect mine and do likewise for me. Thus I motivate you to respond to my cooperation with like cooperation by the hopes on your part that I will cooperate with you, and you likewise motivate me to cooperate with you in the hopes that you will continue to cooperate with me. This is what is called a Nash equilibrium: because we both follow the same strategy, it is optimal for both of us to continue this strategy in most cases; otherwise, we loose benefits.

Second, because human beings actually are *more* motivated by reciprocity than would be suggested by the purely rational calculus outlined above: we are motivated to cooperate with people who have cooperated with us even if it is a one time interaction[^2], and to go out of our way to cooperate with those who have cooperated with us, or punish those who did not, even when it is irrational to do so in a direct cost-benefit analysis[^3] [^4]. We are motivated to do this by feelings such as anger and resentment, but also friendship, trust, gratitude, and more. It would be foolish not to be aware of this aspect of human existence and actions in others. It would also be foolish to ignore these feelings in ourselves and try to stick to a rational decision theory only, as those feelings are their own negative or positive rewards, that, when not taken into account, take their own toll. Consider, also, that engaging in this form of positive reciprocity with others will actually encourage them to cooperate with you *even if they don't like you*.[^5]

[^2]: https://www.pnas.org/content/108/32/13335
[^3]: https://sci-hubtw.hkvisa.net/10.1177/0146167200261008
[^4]: https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.14.3.159

[^5]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0022103171900254?via%3Dihub

Reciprocity is not always just about cooperation and goodwill, however. As mentioned when speaking about punishment and resentment above, in more extreme interactions, where someone not only ceases to cooperate positively, but actually does something negative, actors can respond with **negative reciprocity**. If you actively violate my autonomy, and interact with me in a way that is unfair and deleterious to me, it is in my interest to repay that with like and proportional disregard and harm, so as to motivate you to cease doing that, and it is likewise in your interest to commit to the same strategy, to motivate me to avoid harming you.

Importantly, in the case of negative reciprocity, one can only prove one's commitment to this strategy of repaying harm with harm and unfairness with unfairness by action if someone else has already committed a harm or unfairness towards you, otherwise you would be the one ceasing cooperation first, so it is important to *verbally* post one's commitment to this strategy in order to make it known as a deterrant, whereas with positive reciprocity one can simply demonstrate with actions. Therefore, it is often beneficial to have explicit agreements or contracts with others concerning what will cause each of you to engage in negative reciprocity and to what degree, and to form mutual associations to multiply the force of such a commitment. Thus a "law" of sorts, built in game theoretic committment strategies and contracts, forms in the egalitarian world of mutual reciprocal interaction.

Proportionality is also crucially important when engaging in negative reciprocity: after all, if one engages in a grossly disproportionate act of retribution, others in the social mesh of mutual reciprocity that is the "community," including and especially the ones you reacted against, are far more likely to view this as a *new* violation of mutual respect for other's autonomy, instead of a proper response. Meanwhile, if you stick to something in like kind and proportional, it will be clearer what it is a response to, and that it is not an overpayment. This is how one avoids blood feuds and the destruction of the social mesh that comes with such things. Importantly, the proportionality of the violation will have to be established mutually, through mediation with the one you are in conflict with, and socially if others are likely to act on behalf of the one you are retaliating against, or view you as a threat and cease positive reciprocation with you in return for perceived violations of proportionality (which it is in their interest to do, in order to incentivize everyone in the community to stay playing the reciprocal game even better).

Additionally, in a social situation where multiple people are all engaged in interactions with each other in a complex network, distributed cooperation or non-cooperation is possible. If one wants others to engage in sanctions against those who don't cooperate with them and respect their autonomy, in order to multiply the power of their threats, or engage in cooperation with those who benefit them, to multiply the power of their bargaining, they need only promise to do likewise for the others (a contract which itself is enforced by positive and negative reciprocation), and it becomes possible for the the whole social network to become self-healing and self-reinforcing! Through the use of reciprocity, cooperation on the part of each of society's members is rewarded, and harm punished, by not just the specific people involved, but by others as well (all, most, or just some). Thus if there are disparities in power between individuals, they can be evened out by the weaker individuals banding together to protect each other from the strong, and reward the strong even more generously for their cooperation.

This ethic of reciprocity might begin to sound like the primitive ethics of "an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth," but there are crucial differences. Primarily, not hurting others (by being unfair to them, exploiting them, or by disrespecting their autonomy as individuals) is a form of positive cooperation with them, and therefore there is a positive clause to balance the negative one: "a gift for a gift and an eye for an eye." Furthermore, this strategy, while primitive, is so lasting for a reason: it is actually, as I believe I have demonstrated, and has been extensively demonstrated in various scientific disciplines, one of the best strategies for actors that have to engage in repeated interactions with each other and/or can gain reputations.[^6] [^7] [^8] [^9] [^10]

[^6]: https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/evolution-the-self/201607/the-prisoner-s-dilemma-and-the-virtues-tit-tat
[^7]: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-20426-w
[^8]: https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/406755
[^9]: https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.7466396
[^10]: https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rspb.2013.1615

According to social anthropologists, reciprocity is actually a powerful basis for the success of our species and the formation of civilization. Quoting from [Wikipeida](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reciprocity_(social_psychology)#An_adaptive_mechanism) (because I don't have access to the sources it is referencing, and because it's quite clearly written):

> Richard Leakey and [Roger Lewin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roger_Lewin) attribute the very nature of humans to reciprocity. They claim humans  survived because our ancestors learned to share goods and services "in  an honored network of obligation".[[11\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reciprocity_(social_psychology)#cite_note-11) ... [Cultural anthropologists](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cultural_anthropology) support this idea in what they call the "web of indebtedness" where  reciprocity is viewed as an adaptive mechanism to enhance survival.[[12\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reciprocity_(social_psychology)#cite_note-12) Within this approach, **reciprocity creates an interdependent environment where labor is divided so that humans may be more efficient**. For  example, if one member of the group cares for the children while another member hunts for food for the group, each member has provided a service and received one in return. Each member can devote more time and  attention to his or her allotted task and the whole group benefits. This meant that individuals could give away resources without actually  giving them away. **Through the rule of reciprocity, sophisticated systems of aid and trade were possible bringing immense benefits to the  societies that utilized them.[[1\]](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reciprocity_(social_psychology)#cite_note-:1-1) Given the benefits of reciprocity at the societal level, it is not  surprising that the norm has persisted and dictates our present  cognition and behavior.**

### 3.2. The Principles of Reciprocity

There is a fundamental difference between two kinds of positive reciprocity, and so far I have treated these two variations of reciprocity as equivalent for the sake of simplifying the foregoing conceptual analysis. I think it is time, however, to split them out, as I begin to formalize what the principles an individual following this ethic of reciprocity would follow.

These two forms of positive reciprocity are *active* positive reciprocity and *passive* positive reciprocity. Passive positive reciprocity is cooperation with others to the extent of *avoiding* taking certain actions towards them. This is best exemplified in positive reciprocity with respect to autonomy: to positively cooperate with someone in respecting their autonomy, all I need do is refrain from interfering with them. Conversely, active positive reciprocity is more stringent: I need to actually take a particular action that is different from the action I would have taken otherwise, in order to give a positive gain to the other person that they would not have received had I not taken that action. It is the act of giving a gift, as compared to the act of simply leaving someone alone.

Passive positive reciprocity, because it usually requires so little from the person giving it, while increasing the liklihood of receiving something so important (safety from harm and theft, and one's autonomy to act and pursue one's own interests without being subordinated to or hindered unjustly by another) is a principle which holds effect in a far greater range of circumstances for a self interested actor than active positive reciprocity. After all, this ethic is only a set of heuristics and principles for a self-interested person to act by, not an absolute deontological set of rules handed down from on high, so if great enough needs arise, it can (and should) be cast to the wayside.

This is why there is a greater expectation and focus, in my ethical and social writing, on passive positive reciprocity, in the respect for the autonomy and boundaries of others, than there is for active positive reciprocity, which is by far a more variable principle and depends almost exclusively on individual circumstance.

In light of this, the first and most important principle of the ethic of reciprocity is this:

#### (1) **DO NOT HARM OTHERS IF THEY HAVE NOT HARMED YOU.**

This is the principle of passive positive reciprocity: cooperate with others, by *not* invading their boundaries and by respecting their autonomy, as long as they continue to do likewise and in the interests of encouraging them to do so. If they cease to cooperate with you, cease to cooperate with them: you are free to take positive action against them and their boundaries, to a proportionate degree. I will cover this in the next principle. If they begin cooperating again, return to cooperation with them, as that will ensure that they have an incentive to continue to cooperate with you, since if you will cease cooperating with them permamnently, they have no incentive to start cooperating again either, because you won't respect them either way, and that way lies feud and gain for no one.

Always, then, the first principle is to maintain and continue and encourage *positive* passive reciprocal relations, whether that means opening with cooperation with new people, building up commitments and a reputation for such cooperation, or forgiving people (perhaps after some reparations to you) for ceasing to positively cooperate for awhile and returning to positively cooperating with them once that is done. The point is that when everyone engages in positively reciprocal, mutual relationships, everyone gains, and being willing to return to positive reciprocal relationships, after some punishment (either in negative reciprocation or just the cessation of positive reciprocation for a time), ensures that those who mess up or do bad things have an incentive to stop doing so. 

#### (2) **IF SOMEONE HARMS YOU, HARM THEM BACK IN A PROPORTIONATE MANNER.**

This is principle of negative reciprocity: if someone ceases cooperation with you, especially if they take action to disrespect your boundaries or your autonomy (negative action), you *must* respond in like kind, in order to discourage them from doing so again, and therefore maintain positive reciprocal relations across the board. This means responding to negative actions towards you with negative actions (active negative reciprocity) and responding to a disregard of your autonomy, boundaries, or interests with like disregard (passive negative reciprocity).

Be mindful, however, that the purpose is not simply to punish them for the sake of punishment, but to demonstrate a commitment to not being pushed around; furthermore, the purpose is not only or primarily to satisfy one's own desires for revenge, but to do things rationally. Listening only to one's desire for revenge is how you violate proporitionality in the eyes of the person you are in conflict with and the eyes of the community, breaking reciprocity yourself and making it worse for everyone. Thus it is better to act in a way that involves a punishment voluntarily agreed upon by the person who violated your autonomy and satisfactory, if relevant, to the rest of those with whom you wish to maintain positive relations, in the interests of placating everyone and returning to positive reciprocity while also disincentivizing violating it in the first place. 

Furthermore, it is in your interests to focus on making the ability to positively reciprocate whole again, which means ensuring that the person who hurt you is not themselves unilaterally or unsympathetically punished, and not resentful and unlikely to resume positive relations with you simply because you punished them. This means that negative reciprocation must be more voluntary than not on the part of all parties, even the one who initially broke reciprocity. This does not mean it must always be so, however, because in extreme enough cases the benefit of stopping or discouraging negative action far outweighs the dangers of permanently ending a chance for positively cooperative relations or proportionality.

#### (3) **ACT TOWARDS OTHERS AS YOU WOULD HAVE THEM ACT TOWARDS YOU, AS LONG AS THEY CONTINUE TO DO LIKEWISE.**

This is the principle of active positive reciprocity. This is actually in one's own interest in fewer situations, and to a less significant degree. It should not dominate the wide middle swatch of payoffs the way the previous two rules should. However, when taken as the basis for mutual, peer-to-peer interaction and voluntary, fluid organization, it can be a very beneficial strategy indeed.

The ultimate expression of this third principle of reciprocity is the gift economy and mutual aid, two principles of social organization not commonly associated with left-market anarchism, but perfectly compatible with it and actually endorsed by the principles outlined here.

In the gift economy, one grants needed items to others, with the hope and expectation that one one likewise needs something that other people have, they will grant it to you. Note that the concept of a gift economy relies on the concept of property being associated and rightfully aligned to a person, but simply being granted to others by its owners without a direct and upfront, proportional charge. Hence a gift economy is only possible within the context of a society that supports property as an extension of autonomy and reciprocally respects it.

Mutual aid[^11] is when participants, who view each other as equals, instead of charity-giver and charity-receiver, organize together in an attempt to help each other (and themselves by extension) and solve problems, by attempting to pool what they can give and take as little as possible (only what they need). Essentially, a voluntary organization along the lines of Marx's classic saying "from each according to [their] ability, to each according to [their] need," at a small enough scale that free rider problems can be avoided through social reprecussions, and within the context of individual autonomy instead of absolute individual subordination to the community or the collective. These can work to provide insurance, health care and health insurance[^12], and law enforcement[^13], and banking[^14].

[^11]: https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/can-europe-make-it/why-mutual-aid-social-solidarity-not-charity/ ↩ ↩
[^12]: http://freenation.org/a/f12l3.html
[^13]: http://freenation.org/a/f21l1.html
[^14]: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/william-batchelder-greene-mutual-banking

### 3.3. Why Reciprocity

Instead of relying on a distributed, decentralized network of reciprocal actions and game theoretic payoffs to protect one's autonomy and interests, why not enforce it from the top down? Surely, if one desires to protect and ensure something absolutely, it is better to have a single entity that can impose it by force, for surely anything so loose and fluid as a reciprocal order cannot give as absolute guarantees!

Not so. The introduction of unilateral force into any situation immediately gives everyone who you are using violence against an interest in rebelling against you. Worse, in instituting a system that is above you in order to safeguard your autonomy, you have placed your autonomy in its hands, and have it only at its sufferance. In your attempt to save your autonomy, you have in that very act destroyed it.

Additionally, creating an institution of centralized power introduces an ineradicable conflict between everyone around it. It becomes a race to capture power by those who have a vision of society that they wish to use that power to enforce — whether that power was intended for that end originally or not, power is fungible, and any institution powerful enough to protect your freedom is powerful enough to destroy it — and people who now have no choice but to struggle for power in order to, at the very least, prevent others from getting their hands on it.

Even more terribly, the introduction of unilateral force into a social network destroys all interest others might have in voluntarily helping you and cooperating with you: they will be subject to your violent invasions anyway, so they might as well acquiesce only at the point of your gun.

In essence, while the reciprocal order is a natural equilibrium point, an attempt to introduce a centralized means of control inherently and necessarily destabilizes any network of interactions, turning it into a race for control of the institution, and incentivizing all sides to use it for their own gain and to the detriment of others. The principles upon which such an institution stands, compromising autonomy for some for the purposes of others, subordinating all to its will and enforcing a singular outcome, requiring the fealty of those under it, are principles that undermine the possibility of freedom and mutual benefit. To introduce or support such a thing might benefit an individual in the short run, but ultimately endangers their own interests as well: if you create something that can unilaterally ignore the interests of others, you have no guarantee that it will always operate in your interests; and if you create a culture that sees it as acceptable to ignore the autonomy of some and subordinate them to you, you create a culture that accepts subordination, and sooner or later it will turn on you.

Another question that arises is why one should hold principles at all. Why not calculate out the benefits and costs of cooperation with others in each individual circumstance, and do as one pleases no matter what?

The answer to this is threefold. First, because being *known* to have committed to a bargaining strategy, and taking steps to actually make it difficult to undo such a commitment, is an excellent way to actually get other people to cooperate with your strategy[^38], as they feel they can trust you better. Compare this to someone who respects the autonomy and interests of others only when they feel like it, or only when the benefit to them is obvious and the ramifications of not doing so severe. No one will want to interact with such a person, as it is simply too dangerous. Therefore, self-interested considerations of the general, overall effects of one's actions in a cumulative sense outweigh whatever one might think specifically and in the moment.

[^38]: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/game-theory/#Com

Second, because adhering to a principle unless in exceptional situations actually changes one's habits and character, which is likely to make it far easier and more natural, and therefore even somewhat less costly, and certainly more safe and sure, to follow those principles. Committing to following certain principles, and building habits around them, is advantageous even if in some specific cases ignoring those principles is also advantageous.

Now that I have hopefully demonstrated that the reciprocal ethic is an advantageous set of general principles to live by, and that a society founded on it will be far more stable and peaceful, and beneficial to each of its members instead of just a few, I can now freely continue elaborating it. In the next sections, I will be working out the implications, as I see them, of the two principles (autonomy and reciprocity) that compose this ethic. It should be noted that this is not an exercise in pure axiomatic deduction; instead, this is a working out of the implications of the reciprocal ethic by means of a combination of logic and intuition, as the task requires, since the point of this ethic is to foster understanding and cooperation between people, not purely philosophical robots, and so if something is a clear point of intuitive agreement, whether or not it can be fully justified from the ground up, it is acceptable. As long as the ethic clearly derives from a concern for individual autonomy and mutual reciprocity, it will serve to foster like concern in others, and eventually result in them following these principles as well.

## 4. Property

Property can be seen as an extension of autonomy in two ways. One, it can be viewed as something that provides a sphere of free action for the individual, a guarantor of liberty, as a way to have resources at one's own disposal. Those resources can be used for labor, self-sustenance, or any other exercises of autonomy; the key is that they are separable from the collective and/or the rule of others and one has sole control over. Two, property can be seen as an extension of the past labor time invested in certain objects. To steal an object therefore undermines the autonomy of the labor that was done to modify that object, since now instead of being done for the rational purposes of the individual who did the labor, and therefore being autonomous, it turns out to have been done for the purposes of the thief, and thereby is no longer autonomous labor but servitude.

Given this second conception of property, which is admittedly similar in many respects to the Lockean or Nozickean conception of property, it is important to clarify a key difference between the account of property in a reciprocal ethic, and the account of property in a side-constraints or natural rights ethic. In a side-constraints or natural rights ethic, property must be respected at all costs, and only in terms of its extension in labor, not the consequential extension the possession of property brings to people in having a free sphere for action. This is not the case in my ethic. If the possession of certain property is doing greater damage to the autonomy of an individual or group of individuals than violating positive passive reciprocity in this case would bring by making others (and the community as a whole) less likely to respect those individual's own property, then it is in fact in their interest to cease respecting that person's autonomy as expressed in that property.

This is a tricky calculation: one the one hand, we have a great subordination and loss of autonomy because of the possession of some property by some person. On the other hand, we have an uncertain chance of another amount of autonomy being lost if the individuals harmed, or the community at large, stopped respecting autonomy in property to one degree or another, as a result of the individuals subordinated ceasing to respect the property being used against them. In most cases, the subordination to others that takes place because of property is not onerous enough to justify this: for instance, having to work in order to trade for what one needs in life is a small price to pay for security in the product of one's labor and a sphere in which one is safe to act as one pleases. I could certainly try to live for free off the produce of others, but soon they would cease to respect my autonomy, or my ability to possess things, and I would quickly lose *everything*. Furthermore, in most cases, disrespecting other's property disrespects their direct autonomy as represented in the first aspect in which property means autonomy, as well as indirectly in because of the labor time stolen. Both of these together are a very powerful investment of autonomy into something, and so to stop respecting property in which both of these things are invested is a very great violation of passive positive reciprocity and would be greeted as such.

In the case of *absentee* property, conversely, the story is different. Absentee property, through extortion, rent, or profit, can exact huge losses of autonomy on people, as the loss of something intimately necessary to their ability to labor, live, etc. is threatened in order to get them to subordinate themselves to another's authority docilely. On the other hand, the loss of absentee property causes no loss of autonomy in the first sense in which property is invested with it on the part of the absentee owner, as they were never using that property to begin with, nor was it something they were relying on to maintain their autonomy or free sphere of action. There is a loss of autonomy as represented in the past labor time invested into the property by the absentee owner, but with the benefit in alleviating subjugation, the direct gain in gaining new property to labor on and govern oneself with, and without the added direct loss of autonomy in the first respect, as well as the fact that others besides the owner of the property may not choose to even involve themselves in negative reciprocation, it should be clear that in most cases respect in absentee property should be hard to come by.

Not that absentee property should not be respected at all; controlling the product of one's labor is very important to people's autonomy, and thus the respect of someone's labor time as it is invested in objects is too. A society that constantly, lightheartedly, and frivolously violated property rights, even in absentee property, undercuts half of the reason anyone respects anyone else's property at all, and endangers itself.

On a similar subject, however, and to reiterate a point made some time ago, direct self-interest can overcome reciprocity, meaning that theft and squatting can be engaged in rationally even in the absence of the foregoing considerations, although one cannot rationally request that others do not follow the first two rules of reciprocity and try to remove one from their property or take back what you have stolen.

An exception to this is if the theft or squatting has gone on long enough that the thief or squatter has in fact invested more of their labor time in the object or land or whatever than the original owner did, in which case taking that property back would actually do more harm to the new owner than they did to the old, violating the proportionality of negative reciprocity.

I must note here that one is not simply justified in using any means necessary to protect one's property, but instead must use methods to protect it that are proportional to what the violator did. For example, if someone enters my house, I cannot begin by shooting them. I must ask them to leave, try to guide them out by the arm, and only when they start resisting my attempts by attacking me, may I engage with them in self-defense while also trying to move them out of my house. However, preventing someone from entering my house in the first place is not an attack on their autonomy, as they had no right to be there in the first place, nor is preventing someone from entering some space, as I have just as much right to stand in a certain spot (even if it happens to be at the entrance of some place they desire to go) as they do, and if they attack me to move me out of the way, that is *their* fault.

Furthermore, all the direct and known-beforehand consequences of actions taken in the name of negative reciprocity count as part of their consequences, and therefore must be counted when it comes to whether they are proportional or not.  Thus, kicking someone off of my property and hence directly off the edge of a cliff, forever, does not merely count (as naive right-libertarians imagine) as kicking them off my property, but also counts as killing them when they reach the bottom of that cliff. This does not include consequences of actions taken in defense of my autonomy that are merely the continuation of something that would have happened otherwise, where the violation of my autonomy which I am undoing is merely a suspension of what would have happened had that violation of my autonomy not occurred at all. For instance, if someone is dying, and they hook themselves up to me in order to use my body to survive, when I unhook them, I am defending my autonomy, but as a direct result of my action they are now dying again. This, however, is not my fault, since they were already dying before they interacted with me or I with them, and my action was merely removing an unjustly acquired suspension of an already-occurring process from their grasp.

## 5. Sale, Contract, and Consent

There are a myriad of forms which the hierarchies of authority which sap individual autonomy may take. One is force, another is dependence  (typically through claims on absentee property), and a third, less often discussed, is *contract*. Under the traditional conceptions of contracts seen throughout society and often preserved in right-libertarian writing, a contract is essentially a promise that is legally, or ethically, enforceable. Therefore, whatever each side of the contract promises to do or provide can be compelled from them if the other side of the contract performs their end of the bargain.

This has clearly authoritarian and oppressive implications. On a conceptual level, each person is in some sense the same individual as they were when they originally made a contract, but in some sense crucially relevant to autonomy, they are not. They are a different, similar person, and to be indefinitely and implacably bound to the promises and statements they have made in the past is its own special kind of odious bondage. If I promise to do something, but later realize that it was a poorly thought out idea and no longer want to participate in whatever I promised to do, it is fundamentally an extreme abridgment of my ability to rationally plan my own course in life and choose my actions, as well as my ability to control how my time (and labor) is spent, and with whom, to compel me by force to adhere to my promise. After all, when I, in passive positive cooperation, respect the autonomy of others, no positive action is required of me, and no encroachment is made into the sphere within which my autonomy exists. My absolute freedom is abridged, perhaps, but only slightly, and in return, a much more relevant freedom is ensured. And there is nothing on the other side of this equation: if I refuse to adhere to a contract, *no one's autonomy is abridged!* People are disappointed, certainly, and they may choose not to interact or trade with me in the future because they do not view me as trustworthy, but I *have not broken passive positive reciprocation whatsoever*. Therefore, the only motivation one has to keep contracts is the social motivation of wanting to be viewed as trustworthy and wanting to engage in positive active reciprocation.

There will still be a need for the actual paper and language of contracts to some degree in a world of reciprocal ethics, however. After all, in the social realm, it is still useful to have a record of the promises one has made and the conditions under which everyone agreed to consider them fulfilled, in order to have some way of settling disputes concerning allegedly broken promises and betrayed trust, so that those involved do not get their reputations destroyed unfairly or unnecessarily.

What about when there is mutual consideration involved in contracts, however? In that case, if one side does not uphold their side of the contract, but receives and takes the property of the other, the conditions under which the other side agreed to consider that property a product of the invested labor time of the other party do not hold, and so that other party is currently holding stolen property, which is a violation of the autonomy of the other party, and the property should be returned. Likewise, if the cheated party did labor for the other party, again their autonomy was abridged, as they were forced to use their bodies and time in a way that they would not have if they had known the truth of the outcome; however, labor is an immaterial, ethereal thing which disperses into objects and representations, and therefore, a direct return of that labor may be impossible. If it was invested into a particular object which was then to be transferred to the cheating party, that object becomes the property of the person who labored on it, as one example of how that limitation might be evaded.

In repossessing stolen property, it is important to remember that if damage is down to the thief in excess of the damage done by the theft, and the subsequent defense of that theft if applicable, it should probably be repaid in some way. This is likely to be ensured if both sides are interested, as they should be, in re-establishing positive and cooperative relations, and if both sides have mutual defense or insurance associations representing their interests, as they probably would, both side's interests are likely to be represented, although in clear-cut cases, it will be fairly easy to discern who violated reciprocity — which all parties view it as in their interest to preserve — and so those representing that side will be less likely to defend them because they don't want it to be common for those who violate reciprocity to get away with it easily, as that is not beneficial to them either.

In light of all this, a new picture of contracts emerges under this ethic: one where contracts can be voided at any time, for only the return of any transferred property or labor to their original owners if possible. This respects the choices and autonomy of all involved in my view.

Given the incompatibility of being forcefully held to one's promises and individual autonomy itself, what about sale? It would seem, since sale is simply the promise of an item to another person, that the seller could simply repossess their sold property at any time. This is actually incorrect, however: when someone transfers some property to another, they are not giving up the freedom or autonomy of their future selves at all. On the contrary, they are merely stating in that moment that the labor time that they invested in that object was done ultimately for the gain of that other person, and thereby disavowing a connection with that labor time. Once the connection is broken, it is no longer considered a part of their sphere of free action, their autonomy. Instead, the labor time the buyer invested in whatever they traded for the property is now invested in that property, as they *had to invest that labor time* in order to receive that property and so, by analogy, that labor time is invested *in* the property. Furthermore, it becomes part of their sphere of autonomous action.

One crucial component of any contract, or any other interaction for that matter, is consent. Without consent, one party is merely subjugating and dominating the other party, abridging their autonomy and breaking the positive reciprocation of cooperation. Acting on someone without their consent is in fact the *primary* example of disrespecting someone else's autonomy, because when you do so, you are choosing for them — either directly, through non-consensual physical invasion — or indirectly — through extortion or other means — what happens to their body, time, and life, without consulting them as to whether it is part of their free plan for life, a choice of their own that is a product of their thinking mind. Furthermore, if someone does not clearly know the consequences of agreeing to some interaction, and the commitments that would entail, engaging in that interaction is just as clearly a violation of their autonomy as engaging in an interaction they actively reject. After all, if they do not know the consequences of what they are agreeing to, how can they actually have chosen what will result from that interaction?

What constitutes consent and coercion, exactly, though? Technically speaking, it could be said that any action is 'consensual' if the other party is not specifically imposing consequences that, but for their choice to do so, would not be present, and which constitute direct invasions of someone's body or property completely absent any choice on their part. This is the definition of consent/coercion that is most directly hinted at by the analysis above. This is the simplistic definition of consent: if there is no one holding a gun to your head, or someone else's head, or threatening to steal something, etc., then the action is consensual and does not constitute an abridgment of autonomy.

As should be clear from how I have been using the concept of disrespecting (or abridging) autonomy up until now, however, consent is not an obviously binary thing. The simplistic picture is an incomplete analysis. An interaction which is technically 'voluntary,' in that it does not constitute a direct violation of person or property, or threat thereof, can still remove much autonomy, much ability to choose what to do with oneself and one's time, labor, etc., without being strictly coercive in the simplistic sense. This can happen when someone is faced with options that in themselves represent enough of a loss of autonomy that it seems that to preserve what autonomy they have, they must choose from a far more restricted set of options. Once the stage is set like this, the person is left open to those who control the restricted set of options to use their advantage to control the choices, time, and labor of those with restricted options to almost as great a degree as the other options themselves. Thus, if my choices are starvation, suicide, and working for someone, they can, if they so choose, push the loss of autonomy of working for them all the way up to the point where it is just barely better than starvation or death. If they do so, it is unclear how this choice to work for them, and the life under them, can be termed free, consensual, or voluntary without being nearly farcical. There is no autonomy to be found in the other two choices, and nearly none in the final choice taken; as such, squeezing the autonomy out of the only choice that has some of it at all should clearly be recognized as an abridgment  of autonomy. Not as great as the simplistic version of coercion, perhaps, and depending on the amount of autonomy left in the unpleasant options and the amount squeezed out of the main option, the greatness of the coercion can vary, but nevertheless, using a superior position to do such things represents a violation of positive cooperation in respect for autonomy to some degree.

In conjunction with my arguments in section for with regard to absentee property, this understanding of consent as representing the amount of autonomy left in all the options one has open to one, and violations of consent being perpetrated by those who control the amount of autonomy represented in certain options, present a powerful argument against collectivism, but also capitalism, workplace harassment, and more. This is also what justifies the definition of consent as needing to be ongoing and enthusiastic: if consent is actually positively withdrawn, then to continue is a violation of autonomy no matter what; if consent is not enthusiastic, then there is probably a limiting of autonomy going on, which in turn is probably a violation of the reciprocal order, which might need more or less of a response.

How should this response be carried out? Because consent is more of a gradient than a binary switch, and the degree to which consent is given — and therefore the severity of the reciprocal response required, if any, from either the person involved or the community as a means of protecting each other — any response is going to be inescapably subjective. It is not possible to require (or enforce) a single, legitimate, 'correct' decision regarding of coercion has taken place or not. As such, each person will have to react to an interaction that may or may not be consensual by their own lights, defending the person being taken advantage of, or not, to some degree or another, as they best see fit. Each person's actions and commitment to their opinions concerning the matter will be judged against the others by the action of market forces and the interactions of the reciprocal order, with people who react truly out of line themselves violating the reciprocal order and being brought back down to earth. Thus, a system of 'enforcement' of consent will develop through a stigmergic process, instead of enforcing a single consent standard that might, on the one hand, be too lenient, or on the other hand, bar someone from making a bargain that, while an abridgment of their autonomy, is simply the best option available. Without a centralized system enforcing a single 'legitimate' rule concerning what counts as consent or not exceptions can be made for particular situations as needed by those best in a situation to know what is needed.

To establish a base level of ability to consent, maturing people could perhaps be presented with a rite of passage, or a psychological evaluation that results in a score or set of scores, on the basis of which each member of the community could judge whether the person is generally — when in their right mind, etc — able to consent to interactions, and react to that person and those who interact with *them* accordingly. It would be important that there be no specific 'pass' or 'fail' state to such a test, but instead a score that accurately represents some capacity, so that the decision is made available for all to judge.

There is also perhaps the seeds of a 'just theory of price' here: if the price, represented in property, demanded by a seller far exceeds (in invested labor time) the amount of labor time actually invested in the object, then it could be the case that this person is not respecting the autonomy of the other person, as represented by their labor time, as much as their own. This is not a total violation of positive reciprocal cooperation, but it is something important to consider, and may or may not constitute something that requires correction. This is especially true in the case when the amount of labor time (and invested autonomy) required for the use of property is designed to be indefinite and limitless, such as in the case of rent, profit, or interest: in those cases, we have someone demanding near limitless concessions of autonomy in return for a small concession of autonomy on their part. In this specific case, the limit of any number over a number tending towards infinity is zero, and so it could be said that the landlord, capitalist, or banker, in asking for these infinite rents, has no respect for the autonomy of others. Therefore, in this particular case of unequal price, it is not only an unequal respect for autonomy, which might be dealt with but might not (depending on the circumstances), but a complete violation of reciprocity, which should probably be met with some response. Note that this only applies to people charging a continuous price for a singular item which they invested a finite amount of labor time into in the past; if it is an ongoing service, then it is fair to ask an ongoing price for it.

## 6. Organization

In a society of individuals committed to autonomy and an ethic of reciprocity, it is impossible to dictate, plan, or predict what the specific modes of organization and solutions to problems would be. To expect an individualist anarchist to give a precise account of what life post-state and post-capitalism *would* look like is like asking someone to predict the next invention on the market, or the next philosophy that would be produced, or any number of the other things that are the product of the creativity of individuals, acting alone or in concert. It is simply an impossible task, and a task that no one should *want* to do: freeing up individuals to use their own reason and their own ideas in their organization with others and attempts to figure out how to live with others is the entire point of anarchy, and the fact that so many more creative and individual minds will be set to the task, and so many more new solutions tried, is one of the many benefits. Therefore, not only can I not offer a picture of what an individualist anarchist 'society' would look like, I refuse to! However, I can offer some ideas about what I think will be most likely, and some ways things *could* work. Keep in mind, all the more, however, that these are merely ideas, not plans or prescriptions.

Individuals committed to the ethic laid out herein would probably organize, insofar as they organize at all, in very different ways than individuals in our modern socioeconomic context do. First of all, in order to preserve their autonomy within the sphere of production, there would be a great preference for independent contracting: each individual produces what they think best to produce on their own, under no authority, with the means of production that they personally own and use, under the guidance of no one but themselves.[^36] This ideal is increasingly possible, as the means to manufacture everything (both physical and non-physical) become smaller and cheaper; we can see the seeds of this in the DIY and 'maker' communities, as well as in the world of software development. It will only become more possible without a patent monopoly limiting competition dramatically (especially in preventing individuals from producing patented goods) and enforcing cartelization.[^19]

[^36]: https://kevinacarson.org/publication/hir/

These independent contractors would trade with each other for parts or whatever else they need to produce a finished project at their stage of production, and perhaps create contract agreements to buy certain amounts at certain prices with each other, but such contracts are of course not enforceable and so the network of independent producers would be fundamentally fluid, responding rapidly to the demands of the market and the abilities of individuals, as a peer-to-peer, decentralized economy. This would be further facilitated by just-in-time manufacturing techniques, and prevented from being overridden by competition from large centralized corporations (or cooperatives) by the fact that transportation and centralization would no longer be subsidized by a State. These fluid 'mesh networks' of producers would also be far more efficient and responsive to market conditions, and lacking all of the knowledge and calculation problems inherent in centralized, non-market modes of production.

Insofar as it is impossible to break some process of production down into sections that can be performed by individuals in a reasonable manner that is not overcome by transaction costs, individuals will need to form organizations to produce certain things. It is my opinion that worker cooperatives of one type or another will be preferred for this task. Worker cooperatives are a superior organizational form to corporations for many reasons. It is easier for them to hire workers because they present a far better offer: one in which the profits of working for the cooperative are directly placed in the hands of the workers, instead of the workers having to depend on the caprices, poor knowledge, and adverse incentives of bosses in order to get a reward; in which the each worker is subject to far less arbitrary authority and hierarchy, and indeed retains some control over their workplace, through being a partial owner of the whole business; and one in which, because of that partial ownership, each worker enjoys far greater job security and stability, as well as the hope of decreased hours across the board and stabilized pay in the face of automation, instead of (sometimes) increased pay for some and unemployment for others. Worker cooperatives are also likely to be more efficient, as they do not suffer as severely from worker incentive problems, principal-agent problems, knowledge problems,[^15] and calculation problems.[^16]

[^15]: https://c4ss.org/content/18100
[^16]: https://c4ss.org/content/14497

Of course, the worker cooperative remains a form of authority and hierarchy, just a less severe and despotic one than corporations and bossism: after all, one is subordinated to the collective vote of the other workers. One has some say in it, at least, and at least everyone who is in control is at the same level of the organization as those who are controlled and are therefore subject to whatever rules they make for themselves, but nevertheless democracy is *not* perfect individual freedom, whatever the communists will tell you.

I do not deny that corporations may exist, either, but I suspect they will be greatly reduced in power when worker cooperatives are free to compete with them; right now, under the current state capitalist system, there are very many subsidies, monopolies, and privileges that corporations and the wealthy have received, and continue to receive, from the system which do not stem from free market forces[^15] [^17] [^18] [^19] [^20] [^21] [^22] [^23]. I also think that the economy will be much more focused on local business, whether individual, cooperative, or corporate, as the efficiencies of locality and just in time manufacturing overcome the outweigh the efficiencies of scale and mass-production when the need for transportation, no longer subsidized by the state — and by extension local communities — comes into play.[^17]

[^17]: https://www.cato-unbound.org/2008/11/10/roderick-t-long/corporations-versus-market-or-whip-conflation-now/
[^18]: https://praxeology.net/RC-BRS.htm
[^19]: https://fee.org/articles/how-intellectual-property-impedes-competition/
[^20]: https://c4ss.org/content/38562
[^21]: https://fee.org/articles/is-the-corporation-a-free-market-institution/
[^22]: "Markets Freed from Capitalism" by Charles W. Johnson in https://radgeek.com/gt/2011/10/Markets-Not-Capitalism-2011-Chartier-and-Johnson.pdf
[^23]: https://fee.org/articles/health-care-and-radical-monopoly/

Additionally, under a free market, labor unions would be far more free to equalize the bargaining power between corporations and their workers, capable of taking direct action and using all of the tactics of asymmetric warfare that have been either outright outlawed today or have fallen out of favor for cultural reasons due to the state's co-opting of the labor movement.[^24] [^25] This, in conjunction with the increase in peer-to-peer networks of individual producers, and the likely prevalence of worker cooperatives, will likely force even the corporations that *do* exist in the freed market to be far more beneficial to those who work for them.

[^24]: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/kevin-carson-labour-struggle-in-a-free-market
[^25]: https://c4ss.org/content/16349

In this free market, there will be no official, privileged currency, which only a few banks have the right to inflate and which is the only valid legal tender for paying debts and taxes. Instead, individuals will be free to form mutual banks, and create and trade currency as they please. This will lead to low interest credit being available for all, instead of just the rich and powerful, and to the degree that there is inflation, it will be regulated by the market at large and used for the benefit of the majority, instead of hurting them.[^14] [^15] [^26] [^27] [^28] This will make sure that low cost credit is far more available for individuals to acquire their own capital, without having to go to a capitalist, thereby increasing individual autonomy in the economy. It is also possible that credit, debt, and money will be totally different without a state.[^29]

[^26]: In the market as it currently is today, inflation has two harmful effects on the working class and poor. Firstly, as inflation goes on, prices rise, as corporations are more than willing to raise prices in order to get more profits. This does not translate to workers' wages, however: corporations are far less motivated to raise wages, only motivated to do so by the competition of other corporations, and so if they can they won't do so. Inflation, and the common ignorance of people regarding it, provides a signal that can be used to form essentially a wage cartel without any centralized planning or direction, as corporations refuse to raise wages, and so prices go up while wages largely stagnate. Moreover, inflated money is not air-dropped evenly throughout the economy, so those who get the new money first (the rich and powerful) get to spend it at pre-inflation prices, but as it circulates through the economy those who get it later benefit from it less and less, until it eventually gets to the poor, who have been paying the higher, inflated prices for a long time, and only now get a commensurate increase in wages (if they even do).
[^27]: https://c4ss.org/content/6888
[^28]: https://c4ss.org/content/14775
[^29]: https://c4ss.org/content/52409

In conjunction with all of this, as well as free (and mutual) banking ensuring that inflation is used, when it exists at all, to benefit everyday individuals instead of the rich and powerful, and that everyone can get low-interest credit, the forces of individuals producing and trading private property, in other words, the free market, will tend strongly towards socialist ends.[^15] [^30] [^31] [^32] [^33] [^34] Furthermore, we would, hopefully at least, see an end to the strange, disjointed, and unhealthy individuals in our current society have with work itself.[^35]

[^30]: https://c4ss.org/content/12561
[^31]: https://c4ss.org/content/14459
[^32]: https://praxeology.net/BT-SSA.htm
[^33]: https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/pierre-joseph-proudhon-the-general-idea-of-the-revolution-in-the-19th-century
[^34]: https://invisiblemolotov.files.wordpress.com/2009/09/garychartier_forprint_binding.pdf
[^35]: https://c4ss.org/content/53949

## 7. Law Under Anarchy: the Reciprocal Order

Heretofore I have only discussed how "law" — really, protection and conflict resolution — might be provided in an anarchist order dominated by reciprocal relationships in passing. I think it is probably now the time to elaborate in more depth how such protection and conflict resolution might be provided, given that the description of economic organization given above depends on some kind of coherent, stable order. Keep in mind that the same caveats about "planning" an anarchist society that I voiced above are in full effect here: this is all speculation, and trying to state that this *must be* how it will turn out, or trying to enforce such a result from above would defeat the entire purpose of anarchism in the first place. Nevertheless, it is interesting and sometimes profitable to speculate about how things might be done within the limits of a certain socio-ethical theory, so I will proceed with my analysis.

In the first place, it should be noted that a reciprocal order, once established and understood, is stable in itself: each individual is motivated to continue cooperating with everyone else, even if they are not particularly interested in the cooperation of a specific person, because if they cease cooperation with that person, they might well lose cooperation from others. When they cease cooperation with someone, they run the risk of accruing a negative reputation: others become less sure of positive cooperation on their part being met with positive cooperation, making it less in their interest. If someone does not cooperate with your neighbor when it suits them not to, what is to guarantee that they will cooperate with you?

This, however, is actually a very forgiving system of enforcement, as it may take some time for someone's reputation to be damaged enough to instill such doubts, meaning that a general loss of cooperation from the community, instead of just the individual harmed, won't be immediate, preventing the whole network of reciprocal interactions from crumbling at the first violation. Additionally, this is a response that scales humanely with the severity and frequency of violations on the part of violator, as it operates on the basis of concerns for themselves and views on fairness on the part of the other members of the community, not some unilaterally instituted rule for punishment of violations.

This will probably not be an overly heavy-handed mechanism of 'mob justice' and enforcement of authoritarian social norms, either. After all, no community need be, or will be, wholly of the same mind on a matter. Some may choose to sanction someone for something, but others may choose not to, and it is in the interest of all not to take overly violent or enthusiastic action for fear of general cooperation breaking down. There is no single decided and legitimate outcome, even if a mediator is involved, so the community can arrive at a punishment stigmergically: if some believe others are punishing someone too harshly, they can try to lighten the load and vice versa, and the balance will be determined by the strength of either side's convictions.

Nor would anyone who values autonomy attempt to use the forces of general social agreement to squash someone else's autonomy, when a culture of doing so would likely hurt them just as much in the long run. Of course, general social oppression could not automatically be avoided in this way — anarchy is not a utopia — but neither is it avoided under the state, and at least absent a state, those oppressed will have no unilateral system making them behave nicely and peacefully toward their oppressors.

This is not an overly light-handed mechanism for enforcement, either. If someone truly commits a serious crime, one which cannot be solved through restitution and restorative justice, and which demonstrates a serious danger to others in the community, there will be a strong incentive on the part of each individual embedded in the network that interacts with the criminal to take the necessary steps to protect themselves and each other. For instance, if there is a serial killer in our midst, it would be naturally in my interest to take it into my hands to put them out of their misery to prevent further harm to myself and others.

Note, however, that this is not an inherently *legitimate* action, the perpetration of which is protected from question and investigation. If some people think I shouldn't have killed the person I did — perhaps they think I didn't have the right person, or went about it the wrong way, or there were innocent casualties —I am now on the hook for that. There is no 'qualified immunity' in a stateless society!

Of course, all of this runs the risk of fracturing the community around a particularly contentious crime, creating blood feuds and lasting, ongoing violence and damage, destroying the harmonious functioning of a reciprocal society. This is where mediators and investigators come in. Mediators are useful both for restoring conditions of peaceful positive cooperation between two or more individuals directly involved in a conflict, but they are also useful in the performative demonstration of listening to all sides of the story, and all sides' interests, and constructing a narrative about what happened and what should happen next. Nobody will be bound to adhere to this narrative, there is no 'official' outcome, but nevertheless, in healing rifts and disagreements in communities, this is a crucial office. Perhaps it could be performed for money by some who specialize in it, or simply by someone whom the community views as sufficiently wise and neutral, or by several such people until an agreed-upon resolution is reached, I cannot say, but I do know that mediation is a crucial element here. Likewise, in aid of those mediators, investigators, who specialize in interviewing people, analyzing evidence, and so on, will likely be important.

Outside of a direct clustered network of reciprocal interactions, or in situations where there is low trust and low social knowledge, this process could be reified to some degree by mutual protection associations: in the event that one person is injured in some way, the rest of the organization agrees to participate in laying some sanction on the perpetrator (after establishing that their member is in the wrong, of course, to avoid an unnecessary expenditure of resources and social capital). This sanction could take the form of refusal to trade, ostracism, or even physical violence, and would probably be engaged in only if no restitution to their member was possible, or none was offered.

Of course, it is likely that the perpetrator, if they were not so overly prone to crimes that no mutual protection association would commit to protecting them, would have their own protection association, who would want to protect their interests to some degree, even if they weren't willing to commit fully to protecting them because they agreed that their member was in the wrong. Thus, it would be crucial, in order to avoid costly and possibly ongoing conflicts, to appeal to mediators who have a reputation for fairness, and to agree in contract to some resolution of the situation that is agreeable to both sides. Indeed, it might even be profitable for the purpose of stability to create contracts between associations before any conflict occurs, so that in the event of a conflict between two of their members, there is already an understood and respected procedure in place for handling matters. These contracts might include a mutual understanding of what counts as a violation (different from the rules the associations enforce within their ranks, if they do so at all), what to do in such cases, procedures for establishing guilt and the extent of harm, and procedures concerning the limits of restitution and retribution.

Mutual protection associations would not need to be a solely out-facing phenomena, either. Providing mediation and an established code of norms between their members, democratically decided-upon, might be a quite useful service. This would be superior to how the state provides such services in that the association is non-hierarchical and directly accountable to each of its members, and also because it would be possible to leave an association without legitimate ramifications enshrined in institutions, laws, and society, such as having to leave behind one's home and property, or being killed or imprisoned for treason. This ability to leave means that, by and large, no individual need be governed by rules that they do not agree to; the only concessions they need make is to other people who do not agree to live by the same rules, but even then that is not required, only motivated in order to avoid conflict.

Importantly, in this vision of conflict resolution, every side has allies in a conflict representing and supporting their interests to one degree or another. There is not a single organization that enforces a single mold of 'justice' from above onto the community as a whole. Instead, it is merely the interaction of people, on relatively the same footing, figuring out agreements about conduct and resolutions to conflicts as best suits them, with all of the local information and context at their disposal. This egalitarian view of justice, where it is imposed by incentives and equal individuals, instead of something from on high, is bolstered by its decentralized nature. If every person is, in effect, a law unto themselves, and there is no recognized legitimate set of rules or punishments beyond what those involved agree on, there is no single apparatus that can be seized in order to inflict one's will on others. Even if a whole mutual protection association 'goes rogue' and refuses to cooperate with others, the rest of the society can band against it and crush it under their greater numbers. And if an association begins to abuse its members — which is unlikely, given that the members are the ones who control the actions of such an association, and the purpose of the organization is not one that even remotely requires hierarchy — it is in the interest of the other associations to step in to defend the minority members of that association thus abused in order to gain their loyalty.

It should be noted that in such a society, it would profit no one to have prisons. If those who want to hold people in prisons must pay for the cost of doing so, they will quickly realize that they are only further hurting themselves, after whatever harm the perpetrator of the harm did, in order to get revenge on the prisoner. Why commit to this course of action, when it is even remotely possible to reintegrate people back into society, since once they are thus reintegrated there is no ongoing cost, and perhaps some ongoing benefits?

Thus we arrive at a patchwork view of social order, where most 'law' is provided by merely the necessity of living with other humans and avoiding, or satisfactorily ending, conflicts. For the most part, institutionalized order will not be necessary, as the Nash equilibrium of social order does its work. Order will reinforce itself, and 'law', as embodied in agreements, will be fluid, built and destroyed as needed, and individualized to the specific relevant case. In the few occasions where such institutions are needed, they will be radically egalitarian and decentralized, ensuring that there is competition and free agreement as much as possible for everyone, and that everyone's interests are represented. This is what I call **the reciprocal order.** As Proudhon says, liberty (autonomy) is "not the daughter, but the mother of order."

One of the striking features of the reciprocal order is that in it, everyone's interests are represented, and order is preserved and conflicts are resolved on a horizontal plane, between equals, both of whom represent themselves and are probably backed by allies, where there is not one single verdict or outcome that is universally true or correct. This is in stark contrast to the Law of the State, which is enforced from above, where each side appeals to a third party (the State) instead of to each other, and it does not matter what *either* side thinks the correct outcome is, nor what everyone else involved in the conflict thinks the outcome should be, but only what the State believes is best. It is the State's sole power to enforce a unilateral action against those it deems 'guilty' without repercussions or consideration for the interests of the guilty party. Often, this hurts the those prosecuting the criminal as well, since the State, being a representative always ultimately only of itself, and which can enforce whatever it so desires without considering the interests of either person, has no interest in making the victim whole again, in restitution or making life return to a cooperative balance. No, it punishes the 'guilty' party because they have offended it, and makes the victim pay for it, and leaves both the worse for wear, and with the person thus punished with no pathway to joining society again, and therefore little incentive to cooperate with anyone anymore — after all, they will suffer either way, they are forever marked.

Without a state already in place to defend property that others have little interest in respecting otherwise, and to give them privileges, monopolies, and subsidies, it will be difficult for anyone to become too rich, especially on the backs of exploited others, and so it will be exponentially more difficult for any one person to become powerful enough to institute a state themselves. Indeed, to become rich, one would need to already be rich in order to put together what is necessary to defend and acquire the riches one intends to gain, unless one really intends to engage in a war against everyone else. Hence, in a society with no respect for authority, and respect for other's autonomy only if it is reciprocated and only if it does not severely curtail their own, it will be almost impossible for Kings, Presidents, or Ministers to ever arise again. Thus, the reciprocal order protects itself.

Yes, this vision of a possible society (really, a mesh network of individual peers interacting reciprocally) relies on a general acceptance and knowledge of the ethic of reciprocity I endorse; however, that is true for any order, even statist ones: states only continue to exist on the sufferance of their citizens and members, their tacit acceptance or enthusiastic support of the *status quo*. An anarchist social order only requires the same general tacit acceptance and occasional enthusiastic support. In both cases, they are merely local equilibrium points in the grand space of possible social organizations. The real difficulty is in getting from *here* to *there*, not staying *there* once we get there.

This is why it is not a valid criticism of these suggestions to point out that they did not occur in the absence of a state and prevent a state from arising, any more than it is a criticism of democracy that it did not occur and dominate before monarchy: no social, civilization order is 'natural' and automatic, the culture and social norms have to be right for it to be able to form and survive. We should be no more surprised that 'primitive' pre-state peoples did not form an mutualist anarchist social order than that they didn't form representative republics and free market economies right off the bat.

## 8. The State and The Reciprocal Order

One of the important things to realize is that the very existence of the State not only violates the rules of the reciprocal order, but, as touched on in earlier sections, causes it to decay. After all, if your treatment is not up to your neighbors and those you interact with, but is enforced from above (whether you are treated with respect, or punished), one has little interest or care for what others think of you or how you treat them. If you treat someone poorly, and get away with it, *they* may know what you have done, but what can they do to you that the State will not stop? Hence the very existence of a top-down order of Law destroys much of the inherent interest we have in treating each other well, building trust and communities and relationships, outside of the State and what it can enforce, which is surprisingly little when it comes to the actual harm against people. After all, it is in the State's direct interest to enforce the collection of taxes and other such laws that benefit those in power, but as for actually protecting the people? They care little for that; after all, the people will placidly accept pretty much whatever they do, believing in the lie of the legitimacy of the organization that oppresses them. What little they do care for protecting the individual stems from doing just enough to preserve the fictional legitimacy they hold. They have even made this clear:

> > “Neither the Constitution, nor state law, impose a  general duty upon police officers or other governmental officials to  protect individual persons from harm — even when they know the harm will occur,” said Darren L. Hutchinson, a professor and associate dean at  the University of Florida School of Law. “Police can watch someone  attack you, refuse to intervene and not violate the Constitution.”
> >
> > The Supreme Court has repeatedly held that the government has only a  duty to protect persons who are “in custody,” he pointed out.[^36]

[^36]: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/12/18/us/parkland-shooting-lawsuit-ruling-police.html?smid=tw-nytnational&smtyp=cur

The State also frays the reciprocal order by its very existence in other ways. For one thing, it is a tool of immense power to enact any social or economic change any group wishes to see. Once a State is introduced into society, the race is on to see who can capture it first in order to bend everyone else to their will, be it 'benevolent' or not. Worse, every side must compete all the harder for control over the Ring of Power that is the State because, were their enemies, or even those with simply a different vision of the world than they, to seize control of it, it would be worse for them than if no one had control of the State! Thus, by its very existence the State fosters an endless war of all against all for control of the apparatus of power. All the while, of course, those who seek nothing more than power and are willing to do anything to get it hide behind the fiction of legitimacy, social contracts, and constitutions as slowly strangle their society.

Thus: "**Anarchy is order, government is civil war.**"

## 9. Conclusion: Praxis

So, how do we get from here to there? How would a set of individuals committed to an ethic of reciprocity and the society envisioned therein ensure that the social norms and cultural knowledge are in place to support a transition from the  *status quo* to an order based on an ethic of reciprocity? There are three things such a group ('we' from here on) must do, and two it must not. The road I endorse is long and difficult, but I think it is ultimately worth it for anyone committed to the ideas of autonomy, individualism, and peace.

The first thing we must do is to educate others. Reveal to them the brutality of the state and its illegitimacy; tear down the curtains of the temple of 'legitimate' authority and show everyone the feeble little man that works the controls behind them; show that we need not choose between individual freedom and subjugation to the powerful on the one hand, and individual bondage to the collective on the other; explain how freed markets work and how things can be done without the state; explain a proper ethic of life and rid the minds of our neighbors of the propaganda bogymen that haunt them. This education will provide the soil from which all else must grow. All that is necessary for the state to wither, and a stable order of liberty to grow in its place, is that enough of us reject concepts alien to individual autonomy and embrace reciprocity; we must retract the prostrate acceptance of the *status quo* that allows it to run roughshod over us without objection.

The second thing we must do is build: build alternative organizations, alternative methods of doing things here and now, under the capitalist, statist system, as best we can. A purely intellectual, purely destructive or deconstructive movement is infertile, fallow. We must instead demonstrate that our methods and theories work, insofar as we can, and learn the practical knowledge that will be necessary to construct a stable and functional order in the absence of a state. This positive, constructive, practical action, which can help people even in the present, will draw people to our cause, and prepare society for when, or if, the state does indeed wither away.

The third thing we must do is *think*. No theory is ever complete, because humans are not omniscient. We must not let theory become stagnant dogma, not open to revision or improvement in light of new ideas or new data. We must also let our theories interface with their opposites, their competitors, and their counterpoints. All the best ideas, in my experience, arise from a synthesis of many different sources, each with their criticisms of each other. Thus our theories must exist in a constant state of dialectic refinement or it will die.

There are two things we must *not* do, however. First, we must *not* enforce our ideas on others. I explained why in detail previously, but to reiterate: to force our ideas of social organization — either the absence of a state, or specific choices in that state's absence — on others would be to defeat the entire purpose of allowing individuals full autonomy to explore their options. If a community chooses to not respect certain parts of autonomy, as long as they do so voluntarily, then it would be a violation of their autonomy to try to stop them. Perhaps it might be in our interests to avoid joining such a community or interacting with it, or even to help those who want to escape to do so, but there is no single plan for life and social organization that *must* be followed, only ones that are better or worse for some goals.

Second, we must not become unduly violent. Violence begets violence, death begets death, and blood begets blood. A new order born in indiscriminate bloodshed will live and die by blood, because it breaks reciprocity and sets a standard for all to see and all to take advantage of in a race to the bottom — a race to death. Nor is it an attractive thing; it is primarily only those who are happy with violence, who revel in it, and who are looking for an excuse to do it will join a revolution of blood and death and stay with it. That is not what anyone who values peace, autonomy, and reciprocal cooperation wants.

