---
published: true
title: Fuck the NYT
---
I finally got around to reading the NY Times article on Scott Alexander and the LessWrong community. It's a masterpiece in saying untrue things through omission or ambiguous wording, such that if you challenged then on it they could say they didn't explicitly lie, but so that anyone who read the article without prior knowledge would be led to a very specific conclusion. Also, it tried to set up SA as some kind of hypocrite for revealing his name after they'd already doxxed him when he asked them not to. Plus, the entire idea that they're not-so-subtly pushing in the article is that people shouldn't be free to think about controversial subjects or use their own minds to arrive at positions, because a subset of people who do that might end up with wrong opinions.

Here are some of the examples of ambiguous wording being used to lie that I found in the article while just idly listening:

1. saying that SA platformed neo-reactionaries because he platformed someone that the neo-reactionaries "adopted" (which doesn't mean that person agreed with them, or that his views naturally leads to being an NN, since people can co-opt views)
2. saying SA defended Charles Murrey, and then saying that Charles Murrey was a racist, this implying that SA is a racist, when the phrasing of the sentence saying he defended him was ambiguous about whether he defended Murrey's views, or his right to say them (it's the latter, I read that post).
3. claiming that SA was super verbose and hard to understand, and heavily impliying that he did that to hide awful beliefs or something
4. Saying that the SSC community "removed all those who might push back" on them, leaving it ambiguous as to whether they were removing people who pushed back against the beliefs and ideas they all shared to create an echo-chamber (untrue, even contradicting something they said at the beginning of the article, but the most natural interpretation of the sentence in question) or just removed all the people that pushed back on their right to talk about these subjects in the first place (they didn't even really do that, they just shunned people that were overly hostile or angry in general).
5. Mentioning all the topics that SA covered on SSC, but not describing the conclusions he came to on those topics, only heavily implying that he came to "bad" or "wrong" conclusions.

Sigh.

Sometimes I just want to go live as a hermit somewhere.