---
title: "Ethical Egoism and Justice"
date: "2021-07-06 00:05:23"
tags: ["ethics", "egoism"]
---

**This is another essay that I hadn't released anywhere else that I'm reproducing here for convenience.**

## **Introduction**

Traditional ethical egoism seems to focus on a simplistic account of self-interest, and therefore well-being, that usually only includes a material and emotional dimension, and has no systematic account of human nature or holistic well-being (also known as eudaimonia). As such, simplistic accounts of the implications of ethical egoism are often completely unrecognizable, either to a traditional ethicist or to someone who just wants to know what a good, happy life looks like. Even traditional ethical egoism, however, when care is taken to understand its implications, can result in a system of ethics that looks a bit more like common-sense morality, and actual well-being as we experience it, than one would expect.

One of the more commonly overlooked aspects of ethics in the field of ethical egoism is justice. This seems to be the case primarily because justice seems to require a level of focus on the other, and an amount of universalization, that isn’t particularly feasible in an egoistic framework. I aim to show that this is not necessarily the case, however, by presenting a few basic syllogistic arguments for why justice would and should still be valued by a traditional ethical egoist.

## **Argument 1: The General Case**

This argument establishes that justice should be valued by the ethical egoist in the general case, where injustice is visible and in some reasonable proximity.

1. **Whatever creates the greatest overall well-being (material and emotional) throughout my life is right for me to do.**
2. If others around me are experiencing negative emotions, or are likely to experience extremely negative emotions (such that I can easily envision such a hypothetical), that will negatively impact my emotional state. This is because:
   1. One component of my emotional well-being is universalized compassion: the automatic tendency, and natural ability, to imagine oneself in the shoes of another, either a specific person or a “general person."
      1. https://www.psychologicalscience.org/observer/the-compassionate-mind
   2. This leads to one sharing the emotional states of others. Since negative emotions are more keenly felt and more obviously displayed, negative emotions are conveyed more clearly by this tendency.
   3. Thus, negative emotions or possible negative emotions in those around me impact my emotional state significantly, while positive emotions impact me less.
3. Material well-being is a necessary component of overall well-being, but once it is sufficiently met for survival and/or comfort, emotional well-being becomes more important.

   1. The relationship component of well-being is the biggest factor: https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/the-secret-to-happiness-heres-some-advice-from-the-longest-running-study-on-happiness-2017100512543
   2. The material component of well-being is capped: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-017-0277-0
   3. The hedonic treadmill is a real thing: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hedonic_treadmill 
4. A violation of person or property is the most negative experience human beings can have, even more so than any negative experience generated by lack of material or emotional well-being.
   1. Self-preservation is shared by all living things, and is built into the most basic components of our nervous systems and brains. We wouldn’t survive long if we didn’t have an instinct for self-preservation.
   2. For humans, specifically, we also are a territorial and property-owning species, so our sense of self can extend to the things we have invested our time in and need to survive. Having them taken away is often a worse experience then not having them in the first place, especially since the expropriation of property is often accompanied by physical harm, which connects to (4.1)
5. Through (4) and (2), the largest negative impact on my emotion that others can have is if they are experiencing violations of their persons or property.
6. By (1), (3), and (5), after my own material well-being and security of person and property are taken care of, my next biggest priority would be to prevent the violation or expropriation of others.
7. We call the system that defines and protects the selves of human beings justice.
8. Therefore, by (6) and (7), once justice and material well-being is provided for myself, my next biggest priority should be providing justice for others.

**Note**: After justice is provided for everyone, and material well-being for myself, the largest negative emotional factor that others experience that might impact me is their lack of material well-being. Thus, once we have justice for others, the welfare of others is also important. However, the obligation to help the welfare of others diminishes quickly with the amount to which they lack material well-being, since after a certain point it is not a negative emotion, but a lack of a positive one, and beyond certain extremes is not felt very strongly, especially through the dimming-lens of compassion. Furthermore, if the attempt to supply material well-being to others violates the bedrock level of justice, it causes something worse and defeats the purpose.

## **Argument 2: “Hidden” Cases of Injustice**

Sometimes, justice can be in proximity to the ethical egoist, but hidden, such that premise (2) of the previous argument doesn’t kick in because there isn’t anything to be compassionate about. In this case, we need a different argument.

1. Since overall and lifelong well-being is the goal of an ethical egoist (premise 1 in argument 1), an ethical egoist should seek to mitigate factors in his or her situation which are risks to that long-run and overall well-being.

2. An unjust system presents a risk to well-being.

   1. An unjust system, by definition, has the power and intention to violate the person or property of its constituents. The mere existence of that power is a threat, since even if it isn’t aimed at the ethical egoist at the moment, it could be at any time co-opted.
   2. Unjust systems tend to breed unrest, which often expresses itself in a violent revolution, followed by a *reversal* of that system, such that the ethical egoist, even if they are benefitting from the system now, might not in the future.
   3. Because of (2.2), unjust systems often become authoritarian and dictatorial, which places all of its constituents, even those who are nominally in charge or benefactors of the system, in danger and limits their freedom.
   4. An unjust system usually has no way to appeal decisions or have proper judicial procedure. As such, unjust systems are prone to mistakes, to which the ethical egoist might fall victim.
   5. Unjust systems are often not very prosperous and productive overall, which makes the ethical egoist’s life worse.

4. Therefore, due to (1) and (2), the ethical egoist should, within reason, seek to discover non-obvious unjust systems and eliminate them.

5. Furthermore, the *fear* of the unjust system — even if none of the subpoints of (2) are particularly likely — is a negative emotional factor.
