---
title: "An Introduction to Anarchist Egoism"
tags: ["anarchism", "mutualism", "ethics"]
---

## 1. The Problem With 'Objective' Ethics

The common discourse surrounding ethical philosophy in the mainstream is, I contend, largely meaningless. It is dominated by discussions over reified abstractions that have no real ties either to normativity or reality, phantoms which require only a little thought and a single question — "why should I care?" — to disperse. Under the rubric of mainstream ethics, the words "good" and "evil" seem ultimately to break down to "things I desire to do/see done" and "things I do not desire to do/see done," but yet they are infused with notions of ontological existence separate from any mind or desire. I believe this is, at its base, where mainstream ethical philosophy has gone horribly wrong, and a return to a subjectivistic and egoistic understanding of morality having its foundation in personal desires is necessary to locate a moral philosophy that people can be *happy* following, and agree on, while eliminating all of the confusion in the field.

The fact that moral statements are ultimately reducible to desires is not surprising. Moral statements are ultimately supposed to motivate action, and the ability to motivate action ultimately breaks down to appealing to desires. It is impossible to motivate any individual to act without some preexisting desire on their part that can be appealed to by explaining how that action actually serves that desire. As Hume said, knowledge of some truth alone does not motivate a person to action; there must be some use they want to put that knowledge to, something they want to avoid or gain, for them to be interested in acting on the basis of any statement of fact:

> ’Tis obvious, that when we have the prospect of pain or pleasure from  any object, we feel a consequent emotion of aversion or propensity, and  are carry’d to avoid or embrace what will give us this uneasiness or  satisfaction. ’Tis also obvious, that this emotion rests not here, but  making us cast our view on every side, comprehends whatever objects are  connected with its original one by the relation of cause and effect.  Here then reasoning takes place to discover this relation; and according as our reasoning varies, our actions receive a subsequent variation.  But ’tis evident in this case, that the impulse arises not from reason,  but is only directed by it. ’Tis from the prospect of pain or pleasure  that the aversion or propensity arises towards any object: And these  emotions extend themselves to the causes and effects of that object, as  they are pointed out to us by reason and experience. It can never in the least concern us to know, that such objects are causes, and such others effects, if both the causes and effects be indifferent to us. Where the objects themselves do not affect us, their connexion can never give  them any influence; and ’tis plain, that as reason is nothing but the  discovery of this connexion, it cannot be by its means that the objects  are able to affect us.[^e1]

[^e1]: Hume, David. “A Treatise of Human Nature.” *Online Library of Liberty*, https://oll.libertyfund.org/title/bigge-a-treatise-of-human-nature#lf0213_label_234. See part 3, section 3: 'Of the influencing motives of the will.'

Since moral science is therefore ultimately based in attempting to unearth certain innate desires that can motivate us to act one way or another, there is a perennial search for certain states of being or actions that are so intuitively positive or negative that the human mind cannot *help* but have a certain propensity for them or aversion to them (a certain desire regarding them, in other words), so that anyone who reads a moral treatise based on the application of an analysis of things in terms of those states is motivated to act on the rules and precepts found therein. The common use of moral thought experiments, such as the trolley problem, or extreme moral hypotheticals (such as child murder, etc) reveals this in bright colors: the only reason such hypotheticals or problems work is because they ignite deep and intuitive desires in the people that hear them, that then motivates them to change their actions or beliefs to allow for that desire. Attempting to understand the deep innate desires humans have often requires an analysis of *what*, precisely, the innate desires of human beings are, too.

The desire to motivate everyone who reads one's moral treatise, instead of just those who already share one's obvious and specific desires, also leads to an incentive to phrase things in terms of *anything but* simple desires, because if the subjectivity of the basis for a moral treatise becomes clear, it becomes easier for people to reject it. That is why in common moral discourse all things tend to *reduce* to desires, but the fact that that is the case is often very obfuscated. Thus we arrive at the second problem with moral discourse I referenced in the opening paragraph: all moral logic must ultimately appeal to desire if it wants to motivate action, but there is a strong push to hide this fact and locate deeper and deeper, more intuitive desires, at the same time.

This analysis of innate desires is itself extremely problematic, however, which brings us to why the other feature of common moral discourse, the meaninglessness and unmooring of moral concepts, is unsurprising. Oftentimes, the intuitive desires of philosophers *regarding* certain states are confused for properties *of* those objects, leading to a confusion of desirability (a property that objects have only in connection with the mind) for an ontological property. This can be seen in various forms of Platonism, natural law, and divine command theory. This is what the classic is-ought dilemma is attempting to point out: desirability, or valuability, is not a property of objects (whether conceptual or actual) themselves, and so an analysis that contents itself solely with dealing in facts (properties of objects) will not be able to graduate to the status of normative import without fallacy, or at least a hidden premise regarding desires.

Alternatively, attempts to describe these desires in detail, when they are not confused for ontological properties of the objects and so left aside for detailed and futile analyses of the states of the world themselves, are described too rigidly and yet too inexactly because of how they differ in personal situations. This is seen in virtue ethics and, to a certain degree, deontology. This inaccurate description of innate desires happens because human beings do not have direct insight into what we desire; we extrapolate what we actually desire based on the inclinations that we feel, indications of others, and past experiences, and so whenever we come up with a model of what we desire it is necessarily a map, not the territory. When we make that map a part of our moral system, however, we end up serving something that is only an inexact representation of our true desires and values, which causes us unnecessary pain and contradiction.

In either case, whether we objectify desires into objects, or petrify them into concepts, we end up taking the true reasons why we act on something — that we have a desire for it — and reifying it into something external, which we then serve as if it was *not* just an inexact and externalized description of our own wants and needs. This is harmful to us as individuals for many reasons, and can also be harmful for others insofar as we are possessed of empathy and would, in the absence of such phantoms possessing us, try to help others and avoid harming them. This is why people who have a rigid and exacting morality are not often actually viewed positively by those who have not also bought into the same morality: they know that that person is a ticking time-bomb, ultimately a danger to themselves and others.

## 2. Egoist Ethics

To admit that all ethical thought and action is in pursuit of some desire that the individual has is to admit egoism: I do things not because I *must*, because I am inherently required or motivated to do them by something external to me by some metaphysical process, but because I *want* to do those things. This solves the problem that can be found in most ethical systems, where by some strange loop of logic the philosopher attempts to prove that something is valuable, without providing a reason why anyone should care. When Plato talks about the form of the Good, I ask: "why should I seek it?" When Christians talk about the nature of God, and why I should become more like it, I ask: "why should I become something other than myself?" The answers in all cases such as these, when they are motivating in the least, appeal to my desires: "you will live a happier life if you seek the Good," "you will go to heaven instead of hell."

Yet, if we were to accept without embarrassment the fact that we are always acting on the basis of our desires anyway, we would not *lose* anything by doing so (because we were never acting otherwise anyway), and would gain much in satisfaction, with ourselves and others. This need not turn us into selfish, cold-hearted monsters, as many opponents of egoism would have you believe: not all desires are purely self-regarding. Some desires, perhaps very many of them, are positive and pro-social, and there is just as much reason to act in favor of those as to act in favor of others. If you feel a horror at the thought of yourself becoming a cruel and heartless person, thieving and stealing at will, when you consider becoming an egoist, then you are *already safe*, because all you need do is act on those desires not to become a person like that, which is allowed within the egoist framework. The only change the egoist framework asks of you is that you be *conscious* of what you are doing and do it well. To quote Max Stirner:

>Sacred things exist only for the egoist who does not acknowledge himself, the involuntary egoist, for him who is always looking after his own and yet does not count  himself as the highest being, who serves only himself and at the same  time always thinks he is serving a higher being, who knows nothing  higher than himself and yet is infatuated about something higher; in  short, for the egoist who would like not to be an egoist, and abases  himself (combats his egoism), but at the same time abases himself only  for the sake of “being exalted,” and therefore of gratifying his egoism. Because he would like to cease to be an egoist, he looks about in  heaven and earth for higher beings to serve and sacrifice himself to;  but, however much he shakes and disciplines himself, in the end he does  all for his own sake, and the disreputable egoism will not come off him. On this account I call him the involuntary egoist.[^e2]

[^e2]: Stirner, Max. “The Ego and Its Own.” *The Ego and Its Own by Max Stirner 1844*, https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stirner/ego-and-its-own.htm#p1s222. 

We must always remember that *the map is not the territory*: while each higher concept  or principle that human beings have served (from gods to humanity, from collectivism to property) may perhaps be to some degree a tool for shedding light  on some *part* of our desires, these concepts are not absolute, and we will be happier and better people if we treat them as general principles or rules of thumb, always ultimately in service of ourselves. Make others happy because it makes *you* happy, not because you think you must, because the *concept* of helping others is agreeable to you. Respect property because it is useful to do so, not because it is a fundamental motivating principle.

This might seem like a surrender, relinquishing the field of ethics to the subjectivists, but that is not the case. There are still deeper desires generally shared by humans that we *can* appeal to, or prerequisites and assumptions for all egoism and desire that can be spoken about, or general principles about what is in our interests that hold true; we do not give up the ability to tell someone that they should or should not do something, necessarily. We just lose the absolutism and rigidity of 'objective' moral judgements.

Likewise, we do not lose the ability to interfere in the matters of others: if something goes against our values, if we do not wish to see something happen, why *not* stop it? The fundamental contradiction inherent in moral relativism does not apply here: if no morality but my own, based on my own desires and beliefs, holds sway over me, there is nothing to prevent me from stopping others from doing things I consider immoral. I do not have to refrain from interference with the morality of others, because such a principle itself would have to be absolute and objective.

In fact, a declaration of something as 'evil' is often encapsulated in this: a statement that one will not permit something, will not accept it or stand for it.  When I declare something evil — and this is true for unwilling egoists too — it is a pledge that I would not do that thing, and I would not allow any others, if it is in my power, to do that thing either. It is a statement of stance, not of objective fact.

Furthermore, we do not lose the ability to convince people to value the things we value, or desire the things we desire, through rhetoric and philosophy, just as we have before; so-called objective ethics was no advantage in doing this, and setting it aside will lose us nothing. We will still even be able to form compromises with those who will not share our desires, just as we have done before, without the added complication of each side insisting that *they alone* are right in everything. Those who truly will not listen to such persuasion, the 'crazed axe murderers' of amateur moral hypotheticals, were lost to reasoning about 'objective' moral values anyway; no philosophy will reach them anyway!

## 3. Conclusion

Accepting the desire-based and subjective nature of ethics will, I propose, fundamentally solve the field's problems. Right now, it is mired in obfuscation and confusion, but understanding that all normativity is based in individual, egoistic desire-satisfaction would allow us to analyze more deeply the kinds of things most people desire, and to convince others with compassion and clarity. Instead of beating others over the head with some product of conceptual analysis or some fact of nature which has no obvious inherent relation to what they should do, we can appeal to things that people actually care about, and not pretend the validity of our desires depends on our ability to convince absolutely everyone of them; we will be free to deal with those who do not share them as necessary, without questioning our own values because we cannot convince every skeptic.