---
published: true
title: Well Fucking Hell
---

Damn, Christianity is a helluva drug.

I've long been obsessed with the Objectivist idea of [integration](http://aynrandlexicon.com/lexicon/integration_(mental).html), specifically as it leads to the almost moral imperative that we have to eliminate cognitive dissonance from our psychology. Essentially, if we cannot make our actions, beliefs, and self-identity cohere into a unified, rational, and consistant whole, we will be constantly plagued by [suffering](https://www.psycom.net/cognitive-dissonance).

Well, I've spent two years now rejecting beliefs I had no good reason to have, and making all the rest of my beliefs and attitudes consistent --- in the realm of philosophy, anyway. The day before yesterday, I finally decided, or was forced to recognize, that it was time to do the same for another important component of my psychology: my sexuality.

I've long been aware, in the back of my head, that I'm sexually attracted to feminine men as well as women (although I still have a preference for women), but I rejected the knowledge or assumed it was just an accident or a fluke and didn't really mean anything. I worked the most hard at doing this while I was still a Christian, of course, but even in the years after I became an atheist, I've been working on a weird sort of internalized homophobia where I genuinely didn't have a problem with *other* people being LGBTQ+, but obviously *I* couldn't be. (In part because I thought I was "too ugly to be bi," which is a *weird* thought and I still can't explain why it mattered...)

Recently, however, as I began to slough off the final few components of my indoctrination into "Judeo-Christian values," I started exploring my sexuality, trying to assess if what I thought was the case really was or not. It was a slow process, but ultimately freeing. Instead of feeling like I'd just looked into an endless abyss or seen one of the pillars of my sense of self-worth crumble every time I even considered the idea that I might not be totaly heterosexual, I was curious. Concerned, afraid, naturally, but not verging on an existential crisis.

Finally, two days ago, I was talking with my best friend about sexuality in general, in the context of politics, and I said something and he responded with "oh I thought you were bi." That made him the *third* person to know me well who was convinced I was bisexual. It was at that moment when the final puzzle piece locked into place and I basically thought to myself "fuck it, yeah." It was a similar experience to when I realized, once and for all, that I didn't *actually* believe in God.

The result, even in the few days that I've been living with this eliminated cognitive dissonence, has been like a weight has been lifted off my shoulders. I don't have to worry about it, to wonder what I am or anything like that. I don't have to think I'm straight and then catch myself, well, *not being totally straight*, and have to force the thought or memory of the thought down for some reason.

Ironically, this revelation is seven years after "accidentally" taking out a femme boy from my swim team at the time for what can only, in retrospect, be called a date, and several years after certain other *Significant Clues As To My Sexuality* should have made this obvious. (I'll let you guess what those clues are).

Anyway, this isn't like a super huge thing for me in a lot of ways, because it's been a somewhat gradual process, but admitting what I've started to realize for the past few months officially to myself still warrants a post, I think.

In the next post we'll be back to our regularly-scheduled philosophy rant programming, I promise.
