---
title: "Human Being and the World, Part I"
tags: ["existentialism", "human-being"]

---

> “Everything has been figured out, except how to live.”
> 	— Satre

## 1. Introduction

The most important role of philosophy, in the present scientific age, is that of a diagnostician and prescriptionist for the human condition. The rest of philosophy is either subservient to science, or made obsolete by it. All the great old metaphysical systems have fallen before modern physics, and new ones must gain their premises from it; the conceptual and logical analysis of the classical analytic philosophers finds its primary usefulness in helping science on its way; even epistemology is only useful insofar as it explains the formidable effectiveness of science or suggests incremental improvements to it. Only in the sphere of phenomenology, ethics, and the human condition — the sphere of *existential concerns* — is philosophy still the prime mover.

This revolutionary fact has, in a way, been recognized even by the mainstream community of academic philosophers; but, alas, they have responded incorrectly to it. Instead of focusing all their efforts on this last frontier of philosophic inquiry where science has not, and probably cannot, encroach, they have retreated in the opposite direction, becoming *historians of philosophy*. They do not produce new systems, or reconcile the good components of old ones; they merely produce hermeneutic excavations. Even in the way philosophy is taught, this retreat can be seen. Gone are the days — if they ever existed, since formal training in philosophy began when the production of new philosophy was already on the decline —when students of philosophy are expected to actually *produce* new philosophy, even late in their careers.  No, they are taught to learn what others thought, to put things in the terms of minds previous to, and therefore assumed to be greater than, theirs. Philosophy is, in fact, taught backwards: from the oldest and worst philosophies, to the newest and most robust and intellectually nuanced. Many never even reach that final stage.

I, however, refuse to take the route that mainstream academic philosophy takes. I will freely admit that I am self-taught, and perhaps not the most well-read in primary sources. I will also freely admit that I may not be the most intelligent person to ever set their mind to philosophy. Nevertheless, I have only one mind to think with, and that is my own, and it tells me to set out upon this project, because too few besides me are.

And what is this project? Merely this: to produce an analysis of the human condition, a diagnosis of it, if you will, and then prescribe a possible solution to those problems. The task of the normative philosopher, like the doctor, is simply to explain to their audience what the problems are that are preventing them from achieving what they want, and methods they can use to achieve it. The patient complains to the doctor that something feels wrong, something is off; the doctor inspects them, asks them for specifics about how they feel, and eventually concludes: ah, here is your malady, and here is the solution. The normativity of this prescription comes from the already-felt, indelible desire of the patient for relief, and the choices the patient themselves make about how to move forward. Likewise, the normative philosopher — the philosopher whose concerns are existential ones — examines what it means to be a human, and prescribes solutions, when they can, for the problems and contradictions inherent in that condition; they are problems precisely because the desire for their alleviation is already felt, and therefore the normativity of his prescription may be had, as it were, for "free."

The primary challenge in the work of the normative philosopher is that of subjectivity. We, each of us, have access only to our own phenomena, mediated by our own situated existence and facticity; we must, therefore, be eternally vigilant that we do not mistake an aspect of our own condition that is unique to us for one that is universal and therefore a part of the human condition. A differentiation can be made, in many cases — there are *a priori* implications in what it means to be a thinking, conscious, curious, reasoning agent with a limited experience of the world, which has desires and must interact with the world in such a way as to bring them about — but doing that differentiation is far more difficult than any mathematical one, and far more prone to error. Thus the normative philosopher must proceed carefully, cautiously, and with a steady eye towards phenomenology and epistemology, and must always make their conclusions tentative. This is the core difficulty in diagnosis.

The secondary challenge in the work of a normative philosopher is obvious: the challenge of prescription. It is often thought that once a problem is made clear, its solution is likewise made obvious. This is wishful thinking. Even the most clearly described problem may be intractable or even insoluble. Conversely, sometimes, a problem is not a problem at all: the problem only presents itself because of a deeper mistake in assumptions, expectations, or knowledge, and once that deeper problem is solved, the other problem will dissipate like the vapor it was. Furthermore, the solution to a certain problem might precisely lie in the fact that there is no set solution, that a solution must be generated by the will of each of us, and this might be done in different ways.

Thus the diagnosis of and prescription for the human condition's ailments is a fearsome task, and it may seem vain — both in the sense of narcissism, and in the sense of being doomed to failure — to embark on it; all the moreso for one like myself. Nevertheless, it is a worthy cause. I, like any good doctor, cannot see a patient — all of humanity in my case — so wracked by pain and sorrow and yet turn away from at least attempting treatment. And make no mistake: the human condition is painful and sorrowful by nature. Many have found anesthetics for this pain, but few have found true solutions, and when they do those solutions are invariably too specific to be of general application. I want to present, as best I can, the first few steps on the long path of thought which, I hope, might lead to a true solution more general, unified, and effective than the ones which humans forced to live life and find a way through it have found but not shared or failed to share. It will be constructed from the pieces of prescriptions offered by philosophers before me, and things pulled from my own mind and experience; however, it is all so blended together in my embryonic system that to attempt to cite and quote where each idea has been pulled from would be an exercise in futility.

## 2. The Method of Determining Universal Facts of the Human Condition

The first question of the diagnostician must be: what are the facts concerning this patient which I am to be diagnosing? Therefore if I am to diagnose the human condition, in a like manner I must first understand the facts about it. In other words, I must somehow gain access to facts that are true of the condition of all humans, since "the human condition" is an abstraction, a collective noun, for the condition of all individual humans. This will necessarily be a smaller set of facts than the facts about any individual human condition, just as the facts that are true of an abstraction from many particulars are never as numerous as the facts that are true of a given particular, because some of the true facts concerning those particulars must vary between them — to differentiate them and hence *make* them particulars — and the facts that amongst the set must be left out of the description of the entire set.

From this I can conclude that the facts which are true of my own human condition are a superset of the facts that are true of *the* human condition. The rest of the methodology for abstraction described above, however, is unfortunately pretty much useless. After all, we do not have access to the internal phenomenological facts of other human beings. We have access only to our own phenomena. Therefore, I must, as I described in the introduction, proceed by a different route: instead of attempting to document the facts of as many particular human conditions as I can discover, and draw up an abstraction from that, I must instead begin with my own particular human condition, and discover what truths concerning it are *a priori* products of being a being like myself and which are products of my situatedness.

The key question, therefore, is how to differentiate the two categories of facts. I propose that the basis of this differentiation should still be observation. Instead of observing all the categories of facts that are true of the internal phenomenological experience of the human condition of every individual human being, and then sifting through that list to find the common facts, I will instead observe the external existence of human beings, and compare it to my own external existence. Then, on the basis of conceptual analysis of the necessary implications of such an external existence and an analysis of the correspondences between aspects of *my own* external existence and interior experience, I can determine what shared properties can be found between my interior experience and that of others.

## 3. The Facts of the Human Condition

### 3.1. Consciousness and Thrownness

The primary fact of human existence seems to be that of our subjectivity: our awareness as subjects perceiving objects. Without this awareness, there would be no content to our experience or existence, no components with which to compose thoughts or anything else. We would, in essence, not exist as conscious beings at all, because to be conscious is to be conscious *of something*. Without awareness of objects, it would be impossible to perform any task, including writing this essay.

Importantly, however, there is a split in this consciousness. For, while human subjectivity can serve as its own object — in what we call self-awareness or introspection — there must be subjectivity there in the first place to be aware of, and for subjectivity to be present, there must be an object to be aware of. Hence, without grounding the chain of introspection in a first step where subjective awareness is aware of an object that is not itself, we cannot begin the process of introspection, because there is no subjectivity to ever form the object of further subjective awareness in the first place. Without subjective awareness of external objects, there would be nothing to be aware of internally, when we turn our subjectivity on itself as its own object.

Therefore the *most* basic fact of our own human existence is not merely our awareness of objects of consciousness in general, but specifically our awareness of external objects. Everything else — introspection and self-awareness — is built upon that foundation and makes no sense without it. This means that the fundamental fact of human existence is our embeddedness in a larger world that is outside our direct control by means of thought. The first and most important thing about humans is that we are thrust into a world we have no choice but to perceive and interact with — our unavoidable thrownness (*Geworfenheit*).

### 3.2. The Second Fact: Dual Consciousness

From the first fact, a new fact emerges: there is a foundational split in human consciousness between direct subjectivity, which is conscious merely of external objects, and indirect subjectivity, which is conscious of itself and of itself being conscious in turn of other things. The former part of consciousness is the egoistic layer (or mode) of consciousness, and the latter the narrative layer (or mode). It is still the same apparatus of subjectivity that is being used for both, so these layers are not strictly separate but instead are two modes of the same thing, but it is useful to think of them as layers (that are, nevertheless, interwoven into a moebius strip of feedback loops), as the two modes of subjectivity occur nearly simultaneously when they are both in play and rapidly switch back and forth. 

The first component of consciousness is where our motivations and deepest desires come from: the direct awareness of pleasure and pain and states of the world, the immediate communion with surrounding facts. It is also what generates impulses to act pursuant of these deeply held desires — not merely in reflexes, as one might mistakenly think, but in more complex actions as well. This is the consciousness that we have when totally focused on a single task, whether it be swimming or a game of chess. It is the component of consciousness driven purely to achieve desires by any means possible — the egoistic layer of consciousness. This is the layer that humans most share with the other animals, although we have a much more complex and powerful version of it because of our capacity for language and reasoning. This is the sort of awareness that we have when our ability for self-reflection is (usually temporarily) stripped from us, in intense situations.

The second component of consciousness is the layer that watches other layers as an object — the process that occurs when subjectivity is turned upon itself. The second layer sees the first layer (and itself) as objects that are as foreign and external, in a sense, as any other external object, since that is the necessary product of the alienating subject-object relation, and attempts to draw conclusions about them and meld them into a single cohesive theory about the self. It, essentially, tries to weave all the facts of its existence into a single cohesive whole, so as to portray itself as a single, consistent entity which endures through time and change. This is, in a sense, a fiction, but in a sense a truth, as the brain and body that is identical with the human being does persist through time as a single object. This layer weaves a narrative that is as true as it is false, a story to tell itself about itself and what it is, its history, impulses, actions, and desires. This is, therefore, a layer that is fundamentally *narrative* and abductive in nature, because it does not have perfect access to the lower layer. It cannot actually perceive its own deepest desires, the ones held in the egoistic layer, and so instead must make guesses as to what its desires are through past feelings and impulses to action. This is why people can be wrong about what they desire: what they desire happens at a deeper level than the operation that attempts to examine and explicate this desire, and is out of its reach.

The narrative process also examines the objects of experience that the egoistic process takes in, by noticing that the egoistic process is perceiving things and understanding what it is perceiving, and attempts to integrate them into the narrative story that it is telling about itself as a conscious entity. Each object of experience thereby acquires a "meaning" or "purpose" relative to the agent. This feature of the narrative process will be discussed in more detail later on.

It is only through the second layer that more complex reasoning can occur, as one examines one's own thought processes for correctness and consciously mulls over and integrates what one knows. It is also only due to the narrative layer that human beings are capable of planning, by viewing themselves as an object which can be hypothetically divorced from the self doing the thinking and given different properties (greater age, hunger, etc) and then placed into hypothetical situations. It is also this second layer which allows the deeper communication with others of explaining thoughts and emotional states.

These layers, as I said earlier, are not strictly separate, however. The egoistic process that happens at the lower layer of consciousness receives some of its plans for action and desires from the analysis that the narrative process performs, and the narrative process only runs at the behest of the desires of the egoistic process, just like everything else in the human body besides the autonomic systems.

### 3.3. Thought

After mere awareness, or observation, of an object of consciousness comes thought. The connection between the two — awareness and thought — is often so close that the two are confused for each other, yet they are not one and the same. As those skilled in meditating will tell you, and your own occasional experience will likely confirm, it is possible to be truly and totally aware of an object without thinking anything about it. Likewise, it is possible to have fewer or more numerous thoughts concerning an object of awareness, demonstrating the separation between the two. Nevertheless, the two are also closely related: thoughts concerning objects are generated automatically from the awareness of an object. Awareness takes place in both the egoistic and narrative processes of consciousness (because consciousness is defined by the awareness of things, no matter what process or layer it is), whereas thought occurs only in the narrative process, because only in the narrative process is it possible to analyze objects of experience at an distanced, abstract level, and think about things in relation to oneself.

When a thought is generated in the narrative process, in relation to some object of perception, that thought itself can become an object of perception for the narrative process as it turns on itself, and since whenever the narrative process perceives or is aware of anything it generates thoughts related to that thing, when this thought becomes an object of the narrative processes' perception, it automatically generates a new thought. These thoughts are related by subject, or by logical or probabilistic entailment. These thoughts are then also integrated into the narrative that this process is constructing about itself as a single cohesive entity — and when thoughts cannot be so integrated, such as with intrusive thoughts, it is jarring and even psychologically distressing.

Importantly, this process of thought generation is not "volitional." One does not choose what one thinks: one must follow one's own inner logic from one thought to the next, must follow the clear truth of the thoughts derived from awareness. One can choose to "think something" in the sense of conjuring a random phrase in the mind, but one cannot choose what one thinks is true, right, what follows from one's thoughts. There is volition in the human subject that is an indelible component of our experience — whatever metaphysical truth undergirds it — but it is not to be found here. **The domain of thought is the domain of a mechanical process for the production and weaving of more thoughts; a thinking person, if they pay attention carefully, will realize that they are being carried along helplessly by the flow.**

### 3.4. Desire

The next fundamental fact of the human condition is desire. This is perhaps the most important component from a practical standpoint, as desire is the source of all suffering and all fulfillment, and thereby source of the normative force of any advice or ethical judgment that could be given. Desire is that impulse, instinct, inclination, or sense of value in virtue of which choices are made and experiences evaluated. Desire is a fundamental part of the human existence because all of our existence requires choice. The choices of what to focus our awareness on, the choice to act in order to preserve our lives (or not), how to act, and even the choice not to think. Choice is inescapable. As Sartre said, we are "condemned to be free."

All of subjectivity is selective — there is intentionality to human perception, thought, and awareness, we are not simply passive receivers of all of the available sensory information, nor is our sensory apparatus omnidirectional and impartial — there must be some factor which directs our sensory apparatus and limits, within the range of sensory input it gives us, what we are primarily aware of. Desire is what performs this function: it is our current paramount desires that determine how we direct our subjective awareness (towards what and in what scope), and what objects of that awareness are most immediately sensed and seen as relevant. Thus, under normal conditions, we perceive objects that are relevant to our desires first, and these only insofar as they help or hinder desires, and only in their capacity as tools or obstacles. We view things, under normal conditions, therefore, in terms of purpose or goal: what is the purpose of this object to me? How does this object relate to my goal? Everything else forms a paler backdrop, which we do perceive, but is mostly filtered out of conscious, active interest and awareness, and almost entirely filtered out of the process of automatic thought generation.

We even perceive ourselves only when we ourselves are tools or obstacles to our own progress toward desired ends, which is why embarrassment is such a good tool for inducing self-consciousness: suddenly our very existence in that moment of embarrassment becomes a hindrance to our goals.

It is only when some oddity startles us that we fall out of this mode of thinking. When our desire changes from goals embedded in the world, to meta-goals: goals about our goals or goals about our thinking. It is only when my goal shifts from whatever mundane task is before me currently to perceiving the world around me that suddenly I see every object in perfect clarity, as itself, instead of as a tool or obstacle. Even then, I am still seeing every object in relation to a desire; it is merely that the desire has changed, and so perception of the objects as honestly as I am capable of perceiving them is now the best way they can serve as a tool, and every object can thus serve.

Likewise, we only view people as more than complex and volatile tools worthy of careful interaction and respect in order to get what we want out of them when our emotions suddenly well up in us and jar us out of such thinking. Again, however, this is because the goal has changed; empathy or compassion has made my goal to see this person as a being like myself, for instance.

Like for thought, there is no volition at the roots of desire. Some desires — some set of desires or some single desire — must form the concrete foundation for all our other desires, for, to choose a desire, I must have a desire regarding what desires I have, in order to have a basis for that choice. Thus if all desires were volitional, there would be an infinite regress of them, an infinite regress that is impossible to resolve in a finite mind and finite time. This implies that, to be as happy as possible, the first task of every human being is to discover these immutable desires. These base level desires must be accommodated, because they themselves cannot accommodate anything else. They are also the ones most deeply and powerfully felt, as they provide the justification for all other things, all other thoughts, choices, and desires. But, again, we will discuss this later.

I say "discover" in the foregoing paragraph because, by default, the desires inherent in our minds are unarticulated and hidden from our understanding, manifest at the egoistic layer of consciousness. We are not directly aware of our desires at all — we are merely aware, after the fact, of whether something we did satisfied a desire or not. There is a reward mechanism embedded in the egoistic layer of consciousness, as I have said before, which doles out pleasure and pain in accordance with its nature. There is *not* a table of articulated and specific desires written in language on our minds. That *could not be the case*, because humans are not born with the capacity for language, and our motive power in desires needed to exist before we even had the capability of learning language. Any conscious sense of the desire that we have is a reconstruction performed by the narrative layer of consciousness, as it observes after the fact the whole history of rewards and punishments that the egoistic layer of consciousness doles out, and tries to reason out its best guess at what the the whole being wants inductively.

To summarize, then, we can think of human perception as a series of consecutive filters.

1. First, we receive sensory information, the direction, range, and depth of which is mediated by the desires present in the egoistic layer of consciousness.
2. Next, our brain parses these sensory inputs into an intelligible array of objects and entities, focused around what objects we can pick up or manipulate, since those objects are the ones most likely to be candidates for satisfying our desires.
3. After that, our brain uses the set of our most prominent and active desires at that moment to filter the list of objects most present and vivid in our awareness down to the ones that are directly relevant to the satisfaction of our desires or the hindrance thereof, and invest them with the relevant "metadata" concerning how they relate to us, our desires, and their context.

Importantly, although desires are primarily a phenomenon of the egoistic layer of consciousness, what we know in the narrative layer of consciousness, in terms of the context of these objects, their relation to ourselves and others, our past experiences of the objects, and our knowledge about the use of those objects, is relevant to the selection of what subset of the perceived objects get primarily presented to conscious awareness, so our consciousness must switch into its narrative mode of operation concerning almost every object which passes the first two filters.



Of course, since the narrative and egoistic layers of consciousness are more *modes* of operation for a single entity than separate entities which can call to each other with specific and delimited requests, this switch in order to consult what the narrative layer knows concerning every object in our awareness brings with it the rest of its method of processing, meaning that other memories about objects (or considerations of their meaning and relation to ourselves, etc.) that are not directly relevant to the object's use to us in satisfying or hindering desires, are often brought into our awareness. This will be important later in my analysis.

### 3.5. Temporal Existence

The dual nature of consciousness also reveals the essentially temporal, and temporally interlinked, nature of human consciousness. After all, if subjectivity exists only when given an object, and subjectivity must already exist for it to serve as its own object, then we are faced with a question: how is self-reflection possible at all? For, if we turn the attention of the subject away from an external object and toward itself, does it not cease to exist in that very moment, and therefore cease to be a possible subject for itself? The solution to this question is simple: memory. When we turn our awareness upon itself, we are not turning it upon its current self, but upon the awareness *just past* and preserved for us in memory. Thus all self-reflection is actually past-reflection; the delay is only so brief that it matters little.

Desire, like self-awareness, is also a necessarily temporal component of human experience: it is al ways oriented toward something which is not, at present, possessed or fulfilled, and since the human being is forever being thrust forward through time, the only temporal epoch in which it is possible to satisfy a desire is the future. It is only in the future of the desire that one may act, and only in the future of that action when a change in the state of the world toward the desired one can be made.

### 3.6. The Desire For Meaning

The human world is full of meaning, richly embroidered into the fabric of everything that we experience in the same way that desire is, *because* of desire, as explained in **section 3.4**. Upon turning our attention onto any given thing, thoughts spring up in our narrative consciousness as it is consulted concerning that thing. When this happens, the narrative process cannot help but weave that object into a story in relation to ourselves, our character, and our history, instead of simply serving up the information needed for the rich perceptual apparatus to work.

When I see a chair, it is difficult to see it except in the context of the other chairs I have known, the purpose I know the chair is meant to serve, how I have used the chair in the past,  who uses the chair normally and my relation to them (or whether I am that person), etc, because all these things effect how my rich perceptual apparatus should present it to me, if it should present it at all. Even the word — chair — is associated with the object and with the necessary context that establishes that that word refers to this object.

It is also impossible to perceive any object except as it relates to oneself — spatially, temporally, in likeness and unlikeness. Try, for instance, imagining a chair that has no relation to oneself — not a certain distance away, not a certain relative size. Just a chair. It is impossible. In the mind's eye, just as in reality, any conception of an object of awareness is necessarily in relation to oneself. Similarly, but on a more abstact level, moreover, I also become "the person who saw that chair", and the narrative consciousness notes that "*I* saw a chair today," even if these entries into its running narrative are short-lived and quickly forgotten. This is part of the involutnary, constitutive task of the narrative layer of consciousness: to document and understand *who I am*.

Hence each object is a vortex of purpose, relation, context, story, and memory. This is what we call "meaning." An object has meaning when we can understand it in terms of all these things, and weave it into a coherent and intelligible narrative about ourselves and our character and history. That is what makes a symbol or a word meaningful — its relation to an intersubjective ability to communicate a concept and its relation to real things in the world — and it is what makes a person, object, or experience meaningful too.

The only time where there is a complete absence of meaning in the human experience is when there is no meaning to be had: no knowledge of context or purpose or history. Upon encountering a foreign object, there is a wrenching sense of unfamiliarity, as we for the first time encounter an object in the world *as it is*, without the mediating buffer of context. This is also the experience one can have when looking at images intended to simulate the experience of stroke victims, where everything seems real and familiar, but nothing *makes sense*. It has all lost its meaning. Some can train their minds to produce this effect at will, by changing their desires to those of seeing things devoid of context (this works because all awareness is mediated by desire), but this is not the default state of humanity, or even of the individuals capable of it.

Meaning isn't just a component of the human experience, however. It is a desired component. There is a term in the egoistic layer of consciousness's reward function which motivates us to run the narrative layer of consciousness, with its attendant commitment to assigning meaning to everything, at all. Why is this, besides the necessity to do this for perceptual reasons? It is because, without meaning — without understanding relation and context and history and desire — action is ineffective, dangerous, and impossible, and therefore achieving desire becomes more difficult as well. Seeing meaning in objects in the world is a necessary condition for effectively achieving any desire at all, and therefore it itself is desired.

This becomes all the more apparent when we switch our focus from individual objects to relations between objects or temporal events. In these, a new component of meaning can be found: pattern. Pattern is found in the likeness between multiple objects, which forms the basis for abstraction and therefore ontological induction — the application of previous knowledge of objects to future similar objects — or in the likeness between multiple temporal occurrences, forming the basis for temporal induction, leading to natural laws and cause and effect. These kinds of meaning, existing in the relations between objects, are even more crucial to action and therefore the satisfaction of desire, and thus the desire to finding patterns in things is even stronger for the human being. So strong, in fact, that we often find ourselves finding patterns in things where there are, in fact, no patterns at all!

One of the crucial components of human consciousness is its ability to become an object of its own subjectivity, to turn the apparatus of perceptual awareness on itself and inspect its own Being. What does that look like, when the perceptual apparatus is richly imbued with meaning gleaned from the conscious subject itself? Well, when we turn this richly meaning-infused apparatus on itself, we are naturally led to ask questions concerning our relationship to something, our context, our relation to the satisfaction of some set of desires, our purpose according to something. This is what we are referring to when we say "what is the meaning of life (for me)?" The natural "something" that those relations and desires and purposes should be set relative to is of course ourself, as is the case when we look at external objects; after all, that is how the process of narrative-layer meaning-imbuing works in all other cases: it asks "what is the relation of this object to *me*, what is its purpose to *me*, how does it help or hinder *my* goals?" Yet, because we are *used* to looking at an object's meaning with respect to something external to the object — because when we look at external objects, their meaning comes from us, an object ourselves external to that object — when we look at ourselves as an object, we can sometimes make the mistake of looking for our relation to *something else*, our purpose *to something else*, etc.

Then the natural problem becomes — what something else is to provide this externally-sourced meaning to ourselves viewed as objects? This can become family, friends, communities, or causes, but as often as not it is deities or dictators. After all, that something else was supposed to be ourselves, a conscious personal agent, so the most natural something else to fill that role, if we are looking outside ourselves, is another conscious personal agent.

Of course, this is a misapplication of the meaning-imbuing process, which was built to, and when correctly applied only does, consider things in relation to ourselves. Thus, from a perceptual standpoint this looking for meaning ourside ourselves is a mistake, a bug in our source code. Not only that, but it is harmful, too. If we seek for meaning ourside ourselves and our own existences, we subbordinate our own narrative about ourselves and our character, our own choice about who we will be, what we think, and how to act, to the greater narrative of something other than ourselves, and this process causes us, over time, to lose our unique and individual identity, our ability to stand on our own outside of that external, stifling narrative and choose our own meaning and morality.

This is what causes nihlism, what eats away at the core of humanity, the weakness that religion preys on and breeds: the increase of this mistake, this fluke in our perceptual system, that makes us seek meaning outside ourselves and depend on another, on something else, which can come to supplant our identities, our strengths, our individuality and autonomy. This is why you see Christians spout the idea that without Jesus, they are nothing, and their whole lives are defined in terms of Jesus, the Cross, the Church: their identities have rotten away, if they ever grew to begin with, under the smothering hand of their Christ.

Thus, the question of the meaning of life arises, and because of a common (and encouraged) error, it causes suffering, subordination, and destruction of the self. I will explore this in more detail later.

### 3.7. Action and Will ("Free" and Otherwise)

So far, I have been enumerating facts about the human condition which are primarily focused on its perceptual and experiential aspects. These are important, but they are not the whole story. As important as consciousness and experience are to human existence, action is equally necessary, if temporally and logically subordinate. Action is a necessary condition for human Being, just as perception is a necessary condition for both human Being and human action itself.

Human action is the conscious application of means (elements of the environment and one's own body and time) towards desired ends (states of the world or the self) according to some plan (constructed in the narrative consciousness of the human being).

Human action is necessarily temporal on all levels, in the same way desire is. One acts because one desires to achieve some end in the future, because it is not now already achieved. Likewise, the process of constructing a plan, *choosing* to act and what action to take, is also a temporal affair. There is a time in the consciousness when one does not know what action one will choose, and so, epistemologically, any action that seriously occurs to one at that moment seems equally likely — or at least, roughly so, even if, in actuality, a single choice is predetermined by all the factors involved. One must then go through a process of reasoning and choice in order to uncover which choice one is to make. This is why I phrase the process of choosing as a process of "uncovering": the choice is already guaranteed, by the nature of your mind, your knowledge, and your environment, but it has not yet been arrived at, in the same way that the final motion of a Rube Goldberg machine is ensured and predetermined by the construction of the machine once it is set in motion, but it is not actually arrived at, known (except perhaps by the designer), or completed until the machine has actually gone through the process.

Thus, human beings, in order to choose a plan of action, must represent choices to themselves as serious options which they *could* choose, in order to go through  the process of weighing the options and choosing one — even if this is done irrationally and in a split-second, and even if this is merely an epistemological fiction. Otherwise, the choice would already have to be made. In this way, we must phenomenologically and epistemologically ignore determinism in order to make choices at all. This is where people get the misconception of "free will" from: they think that because each option, before a choice is made, appears *epistemologically* equally likely, because of a lack of information, they are actually *probabilistically* equally likely, such that any one of them could *actually* have been selected given the entire history of the world, and if time were rewound and the choice run again, a different choice could have been made. This is a classic confusion between Bayesian probability and frequentist probability.

I state so confidently that free will does not exist, that all our choices are determined, because the concept of free will is inherently incoherent — a signifier that signifies no meaningful and distinct concept. Indeterminate effect (random chance) and determined effect are mutually exhaustive and mutually exclusive: an outcome is *either* specified by the history of the world up until that point (determined), *or* there are possible worlds in which the history of the world was identical and yet the outcome was different, and therefore the history of the world does not specify the outcome (indeterminate). Libertarian free will is obviously incompatible with the first option, and neither is it compatible with the second. A choice is not "free" if it is fully determined by the past, but neither is it "free" if it is merely made on the basis of a causeless, perfectly random set of metaphysical dice, because in the sense of "free" that proponents of libertarian free will seem to mean, a free choice must be both determined in some crucial way by the character, history, and environment of the agent, and yet not fully determined by these factors, and yet not random either, but *volitional*, whatever that means. They want to take incompatible, contradictory aspects from the two actual options in an attempt to sew them together into a Frankenstein's monster of a third option. 

Nevertheless, and I reiterate this point because it is crucial, the fact that the choice one will make is predetermined from the outset does not negate either the true appearance of free will when making choices — and the vertiginous sense of freedom therein — nor the fact that one actually must go through a process of reasoning to discover what that foregone choice actually is. When a waiter asks you what you would like for dinner, you don't say "let's wait and see." Moreover, because this choice is *in fact* determined, even if it does not appear so, that means it stems in equal parts from one's character (mind, personality, learned traits, inherited traits, all that makes up the specific nature of a person and makes them valuable or not, good or not), what one knows, and the environment around one. Therefore, the process of choice is a process of uncovering, but also simultaneously constituting and concretizing, *who one is* in that moment. Am I the sort of person who will do X? Or Y?

The narrative component of consciousness does not just weave the choice itself, and all that says about one's character, into its tapestry, however. It weaves in the meta-choices and assumptions involved in the choice: beliefs about the permissibility of that action, and other similar actions in relevantly similar cases, abstracted out as reason and empathy demand; beliefs about what states of the world are more or less valuable and how those values weigh in comparison to the actions taken. None of this is avoidable, and to attempt to ignore it is, as Sartre called it, "bad faith."

This is how moral responsibility, inasmuch as it is at all coherent, can be compatible with determinism: when an actor takes an action, there is a *particular actor* that did so, and hence a locus of causation where many millions of causes are woven into one particular outcome that is the unique producer of such an outcome and therefore the most important step in the causal chain from the environment to the action. No environmental or historical factor of an individual guarantees that any other individual would, when placed in the same position, have done the same thing. Therefore, it is the individual themself that makes the crucial difference, even if the environment and history of the actor plays a part. Just as we say that it is the spark that caused the explosion at the gas station, even though it needed all the gas to be there, because the spark is the unique element that made the difference between *that* gas station and all the other ones, so we can say that a particular individual caused the results of their actions because they are the unique and particular element that led to that result. And insofar as their actions *were* in fact guaranteed by their environment, such that no other individual could have helped but to act in the same way (say, through mind control or extreme coercive threats), then we should *not* hold them responsible, because it was not that particular, instantiated, physical, real person that was the deciding factor after all, but the person or persons who guaranteed that they would act in that way.

Likewise, when an action is taken, there is a *particular actor* that is affirming a set of propositions about what is valuable and what is permissible; no one else inherently subscribes to those thoughts because of that action except that particular actor, even if what that actor does is completely determined by their environment and history, and no innate qualities (which is not true anyway). Therefore, there is an identifiable person that has decided that such actions were permissible, along with the consequences to them and threat (or benefit) to the community that that entails. And if there were other actors that manipulated their history and environment knowingly, in order to produce that set of beliefs, then they held those beliefs about value and permissible actions as well, and are therefore on the hook.

Thus, not only are humans, when we act, responsible for uncovering what sort of persons we are through our choices and actions, and the assumed beliefs implied by them, we are responsible for our actions ourselves, as the unique loci of causation that generate them. We are what determines are choices, so if anything we are *more* responsible for our choices and actions, given determinism, than if given libertarian free will. After all, given determinism, our actions and choices are fully implied by who and what we are and where we are, they flow from the intimately sensed realities of our situation, and should feel (as they do, at least for me) natural and inevitable after we make them. While, on the other hand, given libertarian free will, our choices and actions are only partly determined by the intimately felt realities of our existence, and partly by something else that is nebulous and Other, and therefore would feel alien to us.

## Conclusion

In this first part of a three part series on my particular take on existentialist philosophy and normative philosophy — unified with egoism and eudaimonism —  I discussed several topics. First, I discussed the need for this kind of philosophy, and why it is one of the last forms of useful philosophy there are. Second, I discussed my methodology, as it exists in a sort of comparative dialogue between my own experiences and their correlations with outside manifestation, and the input and manifestation of the human beings around me. Third, I explained the seven basic facts of the human experience: the fact that humans are thrown into an existence that they have no say in, and that experience of this existence constitutes our existence and consciousness; that consciousness is split into two layers which it alternates between in a complex feedback loop process, the narrative and egoistic layers; that thought is a necessary corollary of perception for human beings thanks to the existence of the narrative layer of consciousness; that desire is the mediator of all experience and conceptualization of the world around us, and that there must be some base set of fixed desires; the fact that humans exist through time; the fact that humans desire meaning, to weave the things around them into a narrative that is whole and unified and sensical; and finally, the fact that humans must act to exist, and that this action implies a sense of free will that is a denial and negation of determinism, while also a sense of responsibility that is an affirmation of it, and the implied self-reflecting assumptions of such action.

In the next essay, I will dive deeper into how all of these facts come into play in order to produce a core conflicts in the human experience which is the source of our existential suffering. In the essay after that, I will show how solving these core conflicts can bring happiness to even the worst of lives — although it is not in itself sufficient for complete happiness — and ensure more fruitful lives and compassionate and harmonious relationships with others, as well as attempt to sketch out just such a solution.
