---
title: "On Faith and Normativity"
tags: ["atheism", "ethics", "egoism", "religion", "epistemology"]
---

## 1

As a moral subjectivist, I view the only conceivable normative force someone could have to be their own personal desires and motivations. Outside of that, there is nothing that can even coherently be said to impose a duty, or an obligation, or an absolute requirement, on anyone. To briefly summarize my reasons for this, I ask you to consider what it would mean for a normative proposition to be "true." We can say that a traditional factual proposition is true if it accurately describes one's experiences, or accurately predicts experiences, or if it corresponds to some objective world — there are many coherent interpretations of what that sort of proposition means. But what can a normative proposition be true with respect to? What standard could we arrive at? Normative propositions are *commands*, they say what one ought or ought not to do — what does it mean for it to be "true" that someone ought or ought not do something? That certainly doesn't correspond to a state of affairs, it doesn't describe an experience, and it certainly doesn't predict anything. The only sense in which a normative statement can be said to be "true" is if it is *binding* — i.e. if there are sufficient reasons to make it rational to adhere to it and irrational not to. In this sense, I would say that normative propositions are actually normative *statements.* This is a fundamentally different kind of thing than a factual claim: the truth conditions simply aren't compatible. Therefore, while you can *mix* normative statements and factual propositions, you can't *derive* one from the other, because the conditions that make it valid to assert and relate and derive normative statements simply aren't the same ones that you use for factual propositions, and vice versa. This means that to construct a rationally binding justification for a normative statement — i.e. a "true" normative statement, in whatever way that makes sense — one has to begin with normative statements.

This presents a problem, of course: because of the type of things they are, normative statements are not things that can be found "out in the world." Values simply can't objectively "exist" "in" things, the very notion is fundamentally ontologically incoherent, and moreover the apparatuses by which we ascertain objective features of the world work by generating factual propositions, they produce things according to those standards of truth, standards completely unrelated to those of normativity. Even more importantly, the way that normative statements are "true" is not a way that can actually be perceived if someone disagrees with them, so they cannot be established to be indisputably and intersubjectively true in the way factual statements can be. They are simply the conclusions of rational justifications, but if you disagree with those justifications, there isn't, directly from that moral reasoning, any consequence that can disabuse you of that notion if and only if those justifications are correct — whereas, if someone correctly comes to a factual proposition, and conveys it to you, but you ignore them, you'll probably find out, by walking off the edge of the cliff they were telling you was there, for example.

Since we can't get normative statements from our experience of the world, and there's no way to objectively discover them by means that can be shared with others, where can we arrive at normative statements from? If we are to conclude any normative statements, we *must* have some to begin with, but if we can't derive them, where can we get them? Well, they just have to *be there already*. The base layer of normative statements cannot be arrived at by other means than by sheer axiomatic assumption, lest you go into an infinite regress of justifying normative statements in terms of *further* normative statements. Moreover, the only reason you could have for axiomatically asserting such binding normative statements is because you inherently, *already*, *feel* them to matter to you — otherwise you could never give yourself any justification for why you should even care about them, since to do so would require further normative assertions. Thus, they have to bubble up, in a manner of speaking, from our own perceptual awareness, through the *interplay* between our conscious mind and the world around us. This is how *values* (statements about what is "good" or "bad", what we like or dislike) come to be.

Therefore, in order to arrive at normative conclusions, any reasoning must begin with values that are *already present* in someone's mind, values they already feel intimately as normative. Otherwise, they can continue to just ask "why should I care?" and at some fundamental level, unless you appeal to desires that they already have, you simply won't be able to answer. This is why, once you drill down far enough, even the most devoutly moralistic interlocutor will eventually appeal to consequences they think you probably care about: you shouldn't rape because it will have bad psychological effects on you, or others, or people won't like you anymore, or you'll go to hell — whatever. Without doing that, there actually isn't any justification that you can give for why some norm would apply to someone else because fundamentally they'd have no rational reason to care. You would just be making all sorts of factual claims that have nothing to do with them, and claims about what you should and shouldn't do that boil down eventually to axioms (usually *their* values, assumed implicitly).

Thus, centrally, the only kind of justifiable normative statements are those that are based on a relation between someone's personal and subjective desires, and the situation they find themselves in relative to those desires. Outside of that, no normative statements can justifiably be made binding on anyone, because if they don't already feel them to be binding, they simply don't have any reason to care, and no reason can even be given, apart from futilely appealing to *further* normative statements. Of course, human beings generally share certain basic core desires and motivations, and often the same general situation — being embodied social creatures — so this allows some surmise, but the fundamental structure of normativity appears, to me at least, to be subjective.

Normativity is, in the end, then, not really "normative" at all: it is merely the exploration of what one finds important, desirable, valuable, and beautiful, as well as the opposite — trivial, undesirable, bad, and ugly — and the implications of that. A deeply personal process of coming to terms with the full extent of what one does and does not value, which requires personal life experience, meditation, and reflection, as well as an attempt to reconcile one's values where they conflict. It is a process of reaching reflective equilibrium, being at peace with what one wants to see in the world. "Normative" statements are merely an expression of our  desires for the world, for ourselves and others, expressions of emotion and desire, commands and commitments. No one can decide for anyone else what their values must be; they can offer advice, perhaps point out contradictions, and they can state their own values in contradistinction or solidarity, they can even use normative statements to express that they will or will not, support or do not support, the other person's values, but they cannot rationally argue someone to a fundamentally different set of values without reference to that person's existing values.

## 2

This is an insight I've extended to my ethics and my political philosophy rather quickly, I think. So far, however, I have not completely extended this fundamental insight to the rest of my philosophy. Primarily, the one area where this insight has not completely been integrated is in my epistemology. Up till now all of my work on epistemology has framed the discussion in terms of reducing epistemic risk being a normative requirement: unnecessarily complex theories increase your risk of being wrong, so they **should** be avoided; things **should** not be believed until the risk that they are true, and the predictive benefits of their truth, outweighs the risk that they are false. This is the epistemic framing I deployed in my previous essay, the ['Summa Atheologica'](https://blog.alexisdumas.org/2022/02/08/atheism.html) as well, to describe why I saw no reason to believe in any gods or religions, and why doing so was in fact a bad epistemic choice.

Lately, however, I've been questioning more and more the epistemic normativity I've been assuming. I have long embraced pragmatism and phenomenology as the core bases of my epistemology, meaning that the normative force of rationality stems from the practical considerations of our motivations and desires in interfacing with the world *as we experience it*, instead of stemming from some absolute standard of transcendental truth which it is our duty to achieve. Yet I have still been assuming that only *one* kind of pragmatism counts — that is, the pragmatism of reducing the risk of being wrong. I have been treating the requirement that epistemology be "pragmatic" for achieving an individual's goals as a reason to treat doxastic risk-reduction as an absolute goal.

The problem with this is that it ignores that there are many other axes along which beliefs can help us achieve our goals and desires, and how the relative risks and rewards — and various other factors — involved in an individual's life might drastically change the landscape of what beliefs are practical even *despite* some beliefs being objectively more epistemically risky than others.

In other words, I have been doing in epistemology what I long since abandoned as untenable to do in ethics: trying to come up with an objective and context-independent account of what will satisfy all people's desires best, by taking a single aspect of the process of satisfying desires, and reifying it into a fixed absolute. This is simply an inconsistency, and one that needs to be rectified, because I have been assuming in a sense the exact same normativity for rationality that I reject in other philosophers.

Throughout history, philosophers have treated it as a normative duty to adhere to a transcendental truth, a set of rules for rationality, or a set of intellectual virtues, in a way that is perfectly analogous to how they treated morality. In fact, this is so clearly the case that theories of moral normativity have in some cases been derived *from* the duty to achieve pure rationality — as in the case of the Kantian categorical imperative, which he justified in terms of the absolute human duty to be rational even if it does not make us happy.[^1] I rejected such duties as thoroughly unjustified, preferring to focus on the practical concerns of situated human beings interacting with the world around them, ostensibly leaving myself only hypothetical imperatives to work with, only to turn around and embrace the duty to minimize the risk inherent in one's epistemology, ironically a strategy that may not actually be the right one depending on the individual's *actual* situation! To make matters worse, I recognize in all other areas of life and action that absolute risk-reduction is unnecessary, yet I chose to ignore this in my own epistemology.

[^1]: See Kant's *Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals*, [first section](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/5682/5682-h/5682-h.htm#link2H_4_0002).

Why is this? Well, primarily it was because I had in my head a false dichotomy: in my mind, the choices were either that we all had a duty to choose the beliefs that were most likely to be correct, or all beliefs were totally on even footing, one just as good or likely to be correct as another. Thus, although I accepted the rest of the tenets of perspectivism — that all of our knowledge is ultimately predicated on our particular perspective, that no one has access to the absolute truth unfiltered by the angle through which they view it, and that truth is best moved towards not by trying to objectively compare a theory to "reality", but through a dialectic and comparison of many perspectives — I have up till now balked at the final view: that the truth-value of a belief (assessed, for me at least, through risk and predictive power among other things) may not actually directly correspond to its *worth* to the person holding it. Yet, as Nietzsche says, “it is no more than a moral prejudice that **truth is worth more than mere appearance**; it is even the worst proved assumption there is in the world" — that is, nowhere have I seen it proven that truth is of absolute value, nor can it be, because such a claim is in the same boat as the rest of morality: chopped off by Hume's Guillotine.

## 3

This brings me to the second subject of this essay: faith. If I acknowledge that there are other considerations that might weigh against the risk of accepting something for an individual deciding how to construct their epistemology, I must acknowledge that for some people, that risk might actually be worth it. To reiterate what I said before, everyone is different — the context of an individual's life matters deeply to making such an assessment, and furthermore that context is one that will never be fully available to anyone else *but* that individual. Therefore, it is fully possible that someone might be justified in choosing faith over reason, and although that does not require anyone else to make that same choice, or even make that choice justified or rational for anyone else, and although it doesn't overwrite the improbability of the belief, if they choose it willingly, as an expression of their intellectual autonomy, *I should not say anything on the matter.* I should not because doing so would contradict the very values that I hold: people need space to choose for themselves what they will do and believe, according to their own minds, exercising their own autonomy, and me trying to paternalistically tell them what is and is not good for them, regarding epistemology as with anything else, is a fundamentally patronizing and autonomy-reducing move on my part.

This is not to say that faith is a good thing at all times. Faith is a very brave and very scary thing to embrace, and can lead you down some very dark paths as well as some bright ones, because it is fundamentally a risk. It is choosing to believe something based on will alone, to accept the risk of being wrong by going against the lack of evidence, and even the evidence against. Furthermore, some people do not choose faith willingly, knowing the risks, but are forced or tricked into faith by lies, deceit, or indoctrination that hide from them the true risks of their faith and the true rewards of leaving their faith. In such cases, being of a certain faith is just as much their decision as someone who's been defrauded voluntarily made the decision to fall into the trick.

Neither is this to say that I will never speak out against someone's choice to believe something on faith. My choice to not say anything on the matter of someone willingly and voluntarily choosing faith for themselves stems from my personal value of individual autonomy, and as such, if that choice, although stemming from personal autonomy, serves to hurt the values I stand for, although I will admit that no one else need accept my values, and that their faith may still be rational, I will still stand against it. Therefore, if their choice to believe something is not simply a personal choice that imposes risk on their personal lives, but is instead something that substantially influences the lives of others, especially if it becomes something that *harms* the lives of others, then I will speak out against it. Because, to my mind, for as much as it is anyone's prerogative to choose the risks they will endure, it is no one's prerogative to make others bear those risks unwillingly. This is why I rail against many religions: they do not just peacefully live their lives. They spread their restrictive, hateful beliefs, through lies and trickery, hurt other people, and take over the state apparatus. If that were not the case, I would and should have nothing to say to them.

Nevertheless, all that said, for some people, that risk *truly* might be worth it. I'm not saying this as a vapid caveat either: I can genuinely see why someone might choose faith, and there are many beautiful faiths to choose, too. I know people who choose faith and are beautiful people even still!

## 4

I do have one more thing to say on the matter of faith, however, despite the previous section. I think for many people it might be worth it to attempt to live without faith. That way, they can more accurately ascertain the benefits faith has to offer in comparison to a lack of faith. Many people have never tried to live without faith in something, because they have been taught that to do so is to choose depression, emptiness, meaninglessness, or even amorality. I'm not just talking about particularly indoctrinated Christians here: even mainstream secular culture is soaked in professions that having faith in something is beautiful and necessary and an important part of human life. This is simply not necessarily the case —— for some it is, but for some it is not, and I think chances are that the majority of people don't *actually* need faith, they just have never been taught how to live and enjoy life without it.

Thus some people have attempted to live life without faith and found it unbearable when it need not be precisely because they were still operating on religious premises and expectations: they still expected meaning to be granted to them from outside themselves, in a sense, and to be constant and fixed, instead of an every shifting impulse of affinity from the core of their being. They still wanted to view themselves as created creatures, fitted with a singular nature and purpose, when instead they are creative nothings that change as soon as they come into being through the capacity for self-reflection, a wellspring of newness which can become through consistent choice and practice almost whatever they choose. They expect morality to be a set of transcendental laws inscribed in an immutable heaven somewhere, instead of an expression of their own values and meaning pushed out into the world. Leaving faith with these expectations is an exceedingly difficult thing to do; as Sartre says, the absence of god is actually extremely embarrassing for someone who wishes to remove her with few consequences to their worldview. If, on the other hand. you set these expectations aside, and embrace your own meaning and morality, the changeableness and immediacy of life absent the transcendent, absent faith, you may find that, if you give it a chance, it is invigorating, freeing even. Yes there is a certain amount of anguish to be found in the idea that all is permitted, and at the same time nothing is legitimated, that you are responsible to your fellow human beings and must answer to them for what you do, and cannot justify what you've done in terms of anything but your own desires and motivations. Yes there is a certain struggle with the absurd that takes place when one can no longer choose to rely on the special revelation of god for certainty in one's knowledge as Descartes did. Yes, there is a certain abyssal nature to being able to choose one's own meaning for yourself, every day and every hour, and letting it change and flow. But there is a grounding effect, a freedom to it, as well.

And if you choose to return to faith? So be it, and I wish you as much luck as possible! Moreover, having first found your way out of all your unjustified beliefs, all your faith, and returned to the bare necessities for living in the world of your experience, if you choose to return to faith you can build back from a clean slate: the forest fire that burns down half the forest leaves space for new things to blossom, and fertilizer from them. Just as with all endeavors of philosophy, the process is one of questioning your foundational beliefs and assumptions, venturing out into the no-man's-land of uncertainty, doubt, and untenable or incomplete beliefs, and then returning once more to stable, solid, pragmatic footing — perhaps to where you began from, just now with a deeper and wiser appreciation for what you believed, or perhaps to a new place entirely. One must progress, as Nietzsche's Zarathustra said, from the camel, which bears all duties and received beliefs with dutiful patience, to the lion, which rejects all such traditions and duties, to (if you so choose, I don't think this last step is necessary) the child, which willingly chooses and takes on its duties and beliefs.

Importantly, as well, when choosing which beliefs to have faith in, the criteria is no longer truth or risk, it is what makes you happy, what you find beautiful and inspiring to believe, what brings you comfort, and what does not harm others. Good things, things that make the risk seem worth it to you. In accepting that faith is what it is: a leap, a risk, a hope, you free yourself to choose beliefs that express who you are and make you happy. Thus, when building back your faith, you can choose to believe beautiful, kind, compassionate, interesting things — there is no need to return, for instance, to the horrid and judgmental dictates of Christianity or Islam. This is something I already see many people of faith doing: they are choosing to believe things that are expressions of their personality, and their inner beauty and compassion.

## 4

In conclusion: in renouncing the last aspect of unjustified normativity in my philosophy I have gained a new compassion and respect for those of faith who take it as a personal thing, who are willing to take a risk to believe in things for the sake of their beauty. This does not mean that I accept that the things people of faith believe are true; this does not mean that I don't think faith is a risk, or that some perspectives are more likely to be true than others or more worth something than others. This does not mean that I believe all faiths are equal. Nevertheless, I find myself in a more nuanced position than I was before, and I am very happy that that is the case.
