---
title: "What Is A Woman?"
tags: ["transgender","lgbt"]
---

Since Matt Walsh's transphobic 'documentary' _What Is A Woman?_ was released, I've been seeing a lot of people, even allies and members of the LGBT community, reiterating this question. What _is_ a woman? Just what does that _mean_? Well, I've got a simple, compact answer:

<br/><center>
<b style="font-size: 22px">A woman is someone who identifies with womanhood.</b>
</center><br/>

I wouldn't go beyond that for anyone in general conversation, certainly not with someone who asks that question as a challenge or in a "debate me bro" way, because actually elaborating on what you mean by that will take a lot of time and they'll be likely to just dismiss you as dodging the question or being a post-modern neo-Marxist or whatever the fuck as soon as you start to take longer than a few seconds to answer. Because to them, everything has to have a simple, rigid answer, everything has to fit into neat little boxes and pre-defined roles. Subjects can't be genuinely complex and sometimes fuzzy and subjective or relative for them, they start out with a presupposition that all that kind of stuff is "woke nonsense." This is the deep-seated anti-intellectualism of the right that serves as a defense mechanism for having to change their minds. That's why Matt Walsh's documentary is so disingenuous to the core --- he dismisses anything that sounds complicated or vague to him because ultimately it isn't meant to be a measure of who can actually answer, or who's right, it's a measure of his own low comprehension abilities.

However, let's dig into the meaning behind this a little deeper.

There are many different ways in which (or reasons why) one can identify with womanhood --- even among cis women opinions vary, and in feminist philosophy it has been a hotly debated subject for at least a century, not to mention that the concept itself is socioculturally dependent, and is imbued with deep history --- but that's okay, the important thing is that people who identify as women will typically tell you if you ask (that's why the simple way to answer is "whoever identifies as a woman") and also use (some of) the culturally constructed ways that we have of 'performing womanhood' to broadcast their identity because, typically, it both expresses their inward identification with womanhood (and so makes them happy) and helps their identity be recognized by others.

A woman is not a woman by virtue of this outward performance any more than house with a different coat of paint is a different house, because this outward appearance can always be taken away by force or circumstance, or merely not be of interest to them, and exactly what looks "enough like a woman" or even "looks like a woman" in the first place is subjective and blurry, but it is one indicator of that inward identification with the female gender. So, it is this identification of one's ideal self with womanhood that makes the difference to my mind.

Importantly, to determine what constitutes "womanhood," or to identify a woman, or even use the word "woman," we don't even need to come up with a list of necessary and sufficient conditions --- an essence --- that is common to all women! If you think about it, we don't do that for most of the words we use: instead, we have examples of what to use the word on, drawn from our experience using language with other people, and we consider the word to apply to anything that bears a resemblance to those examples. In that fashion we are able to productively use the word and understand what it means in a broad, holistic sense, without ever needing to come up with a set of properties that everything the word applies to shares: each thing that the word applies to can be related to other things the word applies to in different ways, creating an overlapping, crisscrossing network of _different_ relations between each example of the word, where some things are even only related to others through a chain of intermediary relations (like the transitive property in math).

The things a word applies to will all have a sort of "family resemblance": like a family, there may not even be one thing that every member shares in common, but different things (hair, nose, face, eyes, gait, accent) are relatively alike between different members of the family, in different ways. Not only that, but the borders can be fuzzy, because how much something resembles another is up for debate sometimes --- it's more a relative question of whether something is more like an example of one word, or more like an example of another, because almost everything has a commonality with anything else.

All of that doesn't matter, though, because exactitude isn't actually a bar to being able to use a word in a language-game and have people understand what you mean. I can say "stand roughly there" or "give me a red square" and you can do as I ask without knowing where I want you to stand down to the inch or knowing exactly which wavelength of light I want the square to be reflecting. Wittgenstein talks about all of this in [_Philosophical Investigations_](http://fs2.american.edu/dfagel/www/Class%20Readings/Wittgenstein/Philosophical%20Investigations%20\(1st%20100\).html#65) in great detail, presenting counter arguments to various objections you're likely to hear, and I highly recommend reading it. It is dry, but clearly written and, to me, was engaging.

Furthermore, when categorizing _humans_, often times trying to essentialize us or taxonomize actually ends up doing violence to us far more than actually improving our understanding of ourselves and our (social) reality. After all, even in biology, taxonomy is a discipline with fluid categories, fuzzy definitions, many disputes and open questions, and [numerous exceptions](https://blog.alexisdumas.org/2022/06/05/dont-fix-us.html). That is all the more true with respect to humans, with the added difficulty that there are social realities we have to take into account, and also that we often take our constructed, limited, and non-objective categories as not only absolute, but also as having normative implications, implications which can seriously cause harm to those who aren't captured accurately by those categorizations.

For me what's important about being a woman is the family resemblance between what women identify with, how we conceptualize our ideal selves in relation to others who also identify with womanhood, and how we want to be in the world, both personally and socially. This is what is typically termed one's "gender identity."

Now, a natural question might be --- aren't we reinforcing gender roles by identifying womanhood with cultural constructs? Not at all. The difference between what I do and what your average bioessentialist or conservative traditionalist does is that I'm querying the internal sense of identity of the person in question --- I'm asking them whether, to what degree, and in what ways they identify with womanhood, and letting their answer dictate what I believe about them. So a woman who dresses in a masculine way, has a career, has had a hysterectomy, and has no children or husband remains a woman for me because she wants to be a woman in one way or another, wants to exist and be acknowledged as one, whereas a particularly angry traditionalist might deny her her womanhood --- or, conversely, a man with long hair who is stereotypically feminine remains a man so long as he wishes to remain one, unlike the schoolyard bully who might call a boy a girl for having long hair.

Likewise I do not take _my_ conceptions of what it means to be a woman, or my ideas about it, as universal or normative: I do not tell a woman who doesn't relate to womanhood like I do that they are wrong, or failing at womanhood. I do not say to a woman who lies farther along the family resemblance between women, or perhaps at the fuzzy border, that she should move 'more toward being a woman,' because she is equally a woman to me, because she still shares that resemblance and, through the transitive property, is related thus to all other women, and there _is no center, is no essence_ to womanhood for me! Crucially, you will find, that for everyone who truly is a member of their gender, if you deny them their gender they will protest, and if you ask them --- and they have time to think about it and a space to answer without feeling judged --- they will give you an answer about how they relate to their gender. And that is all that is necessary. For me, womanhood is about the feeling of kinship and identification with other women, the way I want my body to be and the way I want to be treated and exist and present myself in the social world. For my best friend, it's about wanting her body to be as female as possible (this is why I call myself transgender and she prefers transsexual). But these are equally valid.

To summarize --- the point is not to abolish identities. Let people who enjoy their identities revel in them, be proud of them, love them, find common cause and community through them, connect to history and literature and poetry through them! The point is to abolish normativity --- telling people what identity they should have, or how they have to fulfill that identity. Let each person find their own _dao_. This doesn't just go for womanhood and manhood, either. This framework also allows for the construction of new genders, by creating new sociocultural clusters of associations, roles, presentations, expressions, histories, and identifications with others, to name just a few dimensions along which gender can be understood, or the mixing of manhood and womanhood, or even the rejection of all gender entirely.

This is what I meant above about trying to force people into essentialized categories ultimately being something that does violence to at least a few of them, maybe all of them to a certain degree. When it comes to matters of social existence and identity, subjectivity and phenomenological experience, complexity and nuance, must be given their due --- humans are complex creatures, after all, and I personally wouldn't have it any other way.