---
title: "The Importance of Autonomy"
tags: ["anarchism", "egoism", "ethics"]
published: false
---

> Of all tyrannies, a tyranny sincerely exercised for the good of its victims may be the most oppressive. It would be better to live under robber barons than under omnipotent moral busybodies. The robber baron's cruelty may sometimes sleep, his cupidity may at some point be satiated; but those who torment us for our own good will torment us without end for they do so with the approval of their own conscience. They may be more likely to go to Heaven yet at the same time likelier to make a Hell of earth. This very kindness stings with intolerable insult. To be "cured" against one's will and cured of states which we may not regard as disease is to be put on a level of those who have not yet reached the age of reason or those who never will; to be classed with infants, imbeciles, and domestic animals. --- C.S. Lewis

Although he himself certainly did not apply the ideas contained in this quote consistently, and while this was more likely a case of a monkey, when put at a typewriter long enough, having an inevitable chance of producing something good, I think that this quote represents, in encapsulated form, why anarchism is so important. In that, it is probably the only C.S. Lewis quote that I will ever agree with.

Anarchism is most often defined by what it opposes: hierarchy, authority, and all other forms of domination. This is important in itself, crucial even, since this opposition is what makes anarchism the most radical, consistent, and liberatory movement - the only one that truly offers an alternative to life as humanity has lived it, with all its pain, alienation, and violence, for thousands of years. The only one that doesn't ultimately just boil down to a sacrifice of the self on the alter of a sacred morality or ideology. Yet, this opposition is so staumch and far-reaching, so through-going, that that in itself acts as the negative image of a picture of what anarchism stands _for_. And I think that what anarchy stands for, beyond anything else, is **autonomy.** I've spoken to some degree many previous times about autonomy. It is perhaps the single word I use most often in my political writings. Yet, I've never before sat down and written at length about what I think autonomy is and why I think it is so crucially important.

This essay could never be a comprehensive account of what autonomy is, so I won't attempt that and I'm going to tell you beforehand not to expect it. Autonomy is an intensely subjective and first-person experience of one's relationship with the material world and the social realities one finds oneself in; as such, it has complex social, cultural, historical, psychological, economic and political dimensions that give it too wide a breadth as a concept to be summed up in essentialist necessary and sufficient conditions. Nevertheless I will attempt to give a useful sketch of the important features of the experience and properties of autonomy, so that I can more accurately explain why it autonomy is so important to me.

## What Is Autonomy?

