---
title: "Tacit Knowledge, Local Conditions, and Social Planning"
tags: ["anarchism"]
---

> To all those demagogues of politics and of philosophy that carry in their pockets a beautiful system made by mortgaging a corner of the future, we respond with Bakunin: Oafs and weaklings! Every duty that they would like to impose on us we will furiously trample under our sacrilegious feet. Every shady phantom that they would place before our eyes, greedy for light, we will angrily rip up with our daringly profaning hands. --- Renzo Novatore, [_Anarchist Individualism and the Social Revolution_](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renzo-novatore-anarchist-individualism-in-the-social-revolution)

If we are to maintain that anarchy is not a social plan, but the conditions for a society that is not planned, then we will obviously have to dismiss with social planning as a whole, and this requires a more thorough deconstruction of the problems with it.

First, however, let me clarify what I mean. People who are facing a certain problem getting together and trying to figure out how to fix it is fine; so is theorizing about the various ways different problems could be solved, as long as no one tries to prescribe those theories as the only correct way to do it. Those are not the senses of social planning I mean. Instead, I am referring to the distinct phenomenon of constructing a theoretical set of social norms and institutions, as I've been discussing, that one wishes to see uniformly implemented in society, which one believes to be the single correct method of organizing, or even nearly so. This particular bent is what Novatore is referring in the opening epigraph, too, when he says "_Oafs and weaklings!" Like Novatore, if someone presents me with an absolute plan for society which must be followed to the letter, even if it is amenable to my sensibilities and interests, my instinct must always be to "trample it under my sacrilegious feet," because I refuse to bow, or ask anyone else to bow, to an idea. But it is not only for purely egoistic reasons that social planning is impracticable.

## The Authoritarianism of Social Planning

As I discussed in the section about revolution, such social planning always requires top-down enforcement in the end. Why is that? Everyone has unique and incommensurable life experiences, different situations, a different perspective, set of values, and personal interests. No matter how rational everyone is (if rationality is even to be taken as a necessarily good thing!), we are all ultimately living in our own worlds, our own incommensurate spheres of subjectivity, constructing our understandings of the world using different data and assumptions, our own different standpoints or starting places, and can never completely overcome that, since rationality itself is merely a tool that uncovers what is already contained within its premises. This means that rational disagreement between individuals is not only possible, but inevitable, even if not all perspectives are inherently "equal." We will inevitably not only arrive at a different understanding of what the costs and benefits of any social system are, but will evaluate even the ones that are agreed upon differently. This is especially true for something like social norms and institutions, which often effect people in very personal and far-reaching, and also very _disparate_, ways, and the evaluation of which often requires detailed and epistemically uncertain speculation about things like sociology, economics, and history.

In the face of this inevitable disagreement, what can a social planner do?

They can attempt to add more and more details and nuance to their plans, opening them up to all sorts of different needs and perspectives, but eventually that will lead to the dissolution of the social plan _as a plan_, relinquishing it into a sort of general social theory, as I am demonstrating right now in my own philosophy. They will eventually realize that no social plan can ever take into account all of the various needs and unique situations, the tacit knowledge and accumulated tradition, the hard-won fruits of continuous experimentation and compromise, that each individual person and community represents. The social institutions that best suit people's needs are often specific to the local conditions, the situated reality, and no plan can encompass that. It will inexorably become obvious that attempting to include all of that explicitly would be an impossible task, always leaving something to be desired, because the project of creating a social plan, _qua_ plan, is that of abstraction to principles and generalizations, removing details and simplifying categorizations (details and distinctions which might be very important at the local scale) in order to make a comprehensible large scale picture. Thus they will quickly realize that the map is not the territory, and pretending that it is is the road to disaster, and be forced to create a more open theory, with space for personality, adaptation, and experimentation --- thus creating a social theory instead of a social plan. 

Within this theory, it will be easier to rule out what cannot work --- what cannot serve everyone's interests because it requires domination and hierarchy --- than to outline what exactly _will_, which is exactly what you see in my philosophy and in Neo-Proudhonian theory in general. This is a fundamental insight, I think, and why individual autonomy and the anarchic encounter are the twin keys that I see as the main positive thrust of my anarchism: it is only in clearing the space for individual experimentation and decision-making that it is possible to create a society that is truly free and treats the interests of all equally, meeting everyone's needs. This is why I like to say that **the way that guides is not the constant way**: anything specific enough to provide meaningful guidance in a particular situation is also specific enough to be no longer applicable somewhere.

The other alternative for the social planner is, of course, to become a reactionary --- to enforce from above the simplified social plan they have in mind, inevitably benefiting some at the cost of others, subjugating everyone to an idea, and creating social distortions and unrest that will eventually bubble up into disobedience which will need to be put down in and endless war against the very people the planner sought to "save" through their plan. Thus it is under the current state, which wages an endless "counter-insurgency" war against its own populace in order to maintain the gross inequalities and power imbalances that have been created as a result of, ultimately, Western Enlightenment and Christian social planning. This enforcement can take the form of social pressure and intolerance, the distributed consequences so necessary to enforcing anything in society being adapted to the task of the suppression of the different, anything that falls outside the lines of the plan; but it will always eventually transform, once the distortions get worse than any possible social censure could be, into outright ongoing violence.

## Conclusion

Thus, the inadequacy of social planning: it cannot deal with disagreement, nor the actual data and needs of people, and because of that, it must either dissolve itself or become violent. It must either say "if it doesn't work for you, well, too bad!" and give up balancing and meeting everyone's needs, or even most people's needs, or it needs to become fluid, malleable, and open.

## Onward

In the [next essay](/2022/07/27/process3.html), I'll explain this general social theory I've been led to.