---
title: "Why Revolutionaries Become Reactionaries"
tags: ["anarchism"]
---

>  Anarchist individualism as we understand it – and I say we because a substantial handful of friends think this like me – is hostile to every school and every party, every churchly and dogmatic moral, as well as every more or less academic imbecility. Every form of discipline, rule and pedantry is repulsive to the sincere nobility of our vagabond and rebellious restlessness! --- Renzo Novatore, [_Anarchist Individualism and the Social Revolution_](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renzo-novatore-anarchist-individualism-in-the-social-revolution)

The first important effect of taking a new perspective with regard to anarchism, like the general perspective I described in [the introduction to this series](/2022/07/25/process.html) is changing one's understanding of the proper methods for achieving it. After all, one of the most important aspects of anarchism is that its methods prefigure its goals --- anarchist organizing is an exercise in practice and demonstration, showing why a world without authority is possible by demonstrating that things can be achieved without it, through horizontal means. Thus, when one's understanding of anarchism changes, so, too, must one's understanding of how to go about _achieving_ anarchism! Thus, once you start seeing anarchism as an ongoing process of learning, adaptation, and experimentation, responsive to local conditions and particular needs, instead of a project of social planning, you will quickly start to see why an insurrection, not a revolution, is what is needed.

## Why Revolutionaries Become Reactionaries

What is the difference between an insurrection and a revolution? The first hint is contained within the words themselves: a revolution aims at just exactly what it sounds like --- revolving the wheel of history and society, exchanging the current unsatisfactory order for a new, different one. The aim is therefore not just to overthrow the hierarchy and domination of the current order, but to establish some new state of affairs.

Because of this, revolution requires a unified intent. Since it wants to establish a new thing in place of the old, instead of just overthrowing the old hierarchies in order to make space for whatever arrangements the individual will finds pleasing, with the same scope and generality, over mostly the same people, it requires centralized organization, in order to make the intellectual and physical enforcement that it needs possible. Everyone must be thus unified because if different ideas of what must be established in place of the old system are allowed to grow and flourish, then the revolution will inevitably devolve into warring factions, each looking to establish rulership over all --- exactly the sort of thing we typically see in the "power vacuum" supposedly left behind by the collapse of states, which really only exists because there still remains the possibility, and expectation, that someone _must_ rule.

Moreover, it is always the most fervent revolutionaries that become the staunchest reactionaries --- after the revolution. As Novatore says,

 > every form of society, born from the fragments of the old one that fell resoundingly into the void, has the conviction that it is the only perfect one. And it is precisely this dogma of perfection that drives [it] to be so utterly reactionary toward the restless Rebel who does not at all intend to bow before the new God... wouldn’t a very large portion of those who pretend to be furiously revolutionary today, themselves be the fiercest reactionary conservatives of tomorrow? --- Renzo Novatore, [_Cry of Rebellion_](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/renzo-novatore-cry-of-rebellion)

This follows clearly from the nature of revolution itself: in order to become a revolutionary, you must have a social plan or set of institutions you wish to establish; for that, you must become confident in the perfection of your system, comfortable in the knowledge of its eternal capacity to fulfill the needs of all people, or its supremacy over needs. Thus you must become blinded to other valid ways of organizing social forces anarchistically, deafened to the needs and interests of people --- in other words, possessed by a fixed idea of what society must look like. Once this end-state is achieved, you inevitably become reactionary, dead set against any change, because your perfect idea of society has been achieved at last! To allow it to change now would be to have it move away from your social plan, your desired end-state for society, and thus would be as bad as letting the revolution go to waste, to fail, and you cannot allow that to happen. Thus, you must protect it against change at all costs, just as smug in your assurance that this social arrangement must be the right one as the capitalist apologists are today. This prevents society from changing to suit the needs the individuals within it, from adapting to the shifting conditions its members find themselves in, and from taking advantage of the increasing knowledge that can be gained through the continuous experimentation and revision of social norms.

Thus, both before and after "the revolution," a revolutionary mindset creates subjugation to an idea: it must introduce a hierarchy of thought, an incorporeal rulership over the individual will, which in turn often leads to a very corporeal sort of rulership, with the accompanying need for both intellectual and physical enforcement to ensure that everyone stays in line. "The revolution was not directed against _the existent_, but against _this existent_, against a _particular_ existence." Therefore, revolutionary anarchism is internally inconsistent, at odds with itself, as its means lead to exactly the opposite of the ends which it wishes to achieve. It inevitably leads to an inflexible, suspicious, conservative society which does not allow any change or experimentation, any learning. This is why prefigurative politics, the application of properly and truly anarchist _means_ in the struggle for anarchism against capitalism and the state is so crucially important.

In contrast, an insurrection is merely the destruction of the old order, the elimination of hierarchy and domination through direct action, sabotage, asymmetrical warfare, resistance, strike, self-defense and community defense, all done in solidarity or individually, with no need for a central thrust or organization. Its purpose is to fertilize the fields of society with its blood and tears so that a million individual arrangements can flourish and grow, not planned, nor ruled by any system. To quote Stirner, "the revolution is aimed at new arrangements, while the insurrection leads us to no longer let ourselves be arranged, but rather to arrange ourselves." Thus, while revolution creates absolutism and the struggle for power through the assumption that a new system must be put in place, insurrection does away with all that. Insurrectionary anarchism has none of the internal contradictions that revolutionary anarchism has, and thus, especially in light of the idea that justice arises from the proper conditions, not out of particular formulas or outcomes, it is obvious that insurrectionary means are the only proper way to achieve anarchist ends.

## Onward

In the next essay in this series, ["Tacit Knowledge, Local Conditions, and Social Planning"](/2022/07/27/process2.html), I will expand on these ideas concerning social planning, and explain how, when trying to create a social plan that is actually in the interests of all of the people who will be under it, that will encompass all of the needs of society, you are ultimately forced to give up a plan with specific norms and institutions, and adopt a general social theory instead, which specifies the conditions for the development of norms and institutions, instead of the norms and institutions themselves.