---
title: "Justice and the Anarchic Encounter: Returning to Anarchist Relations"
tags: ["anarchism", "egoism", "ethics"]
---

> “Another world is possible” every time equal uniques, free absolutes, meet on a terrain shaped by any number of histories but no structures of authority. - Shawn P. Wilbur, ["The Anatomy of the Encounter"](https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/contrun/the-anatomy-of-the-encounter/)

## Author's Note

[click here to skip to the next section](#start)

As has become somewhat of a theme, perhaps even a requirement, for this recent spate of better-quality postings beginning with "Vision of An Anarchist Society," instead of sitting down to `Write About Something` because I want to `Build A System` and building a system _requires_ writing on certain subjects - instead of, in other words, treating my blog posts as chapters in a gigantic book that I _have_ to write to "get it out of the way" - I've waited until I feel writing on this subject welling up inside me. Until writing on it feels natural, an act of outpouring, as if I was already going to write on this, whether I made the choice or not. I spent two days pondering what I should write about, feeling out all the different topics that have been occupying my mind in the past few months, turning them about in my hands and inspecting them carefully, like fruit, to see which was just ripe enough. I waited until this subject was on the _tip of my tongue_ to write about it. In other words, I followed [wu wei](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anna-ronan-anarchism-as-a-spiritual-practice).

And so I find myself back to staring into the depths of the subject of an anarchist conception of 'justice', embodied in a particular kind of relationship, for the first time in six months and three weeks. I've tried this project twice before: once, in the fury of inspiration and shocking, icy, firey _realization_, which led me to produce "Two Principles," a work so deeply flawed in so many ways, so full of both my old kinds of thinking _and_ my new kinds, that I'm still slowly unpacking and developing everything that was good in it even now; then a second time, in a confused, contemplative, groping essay that represented me trying to really wrestle with and internalize what I'd realized through discussions with someone who was very influential to me at the time. This time, I hope to take the months of deep thinking and experience, and far-ranging reading, that I've been carrying out, and apply it to producing something clearer, cleaner, and more coherent than what I've written before on the subject.

## Introduction

<a id="start"></a>

What are the fundamental characteristic features of anarchism? I think that anarchism is fundamentally defined by a single thing - an opposition to subordination, domination, or hierarchies of power or authority - from which two other things flow naturally, and without which that 'single thing' would be incompletely expressed: an opposition to governmentalism (the principle which tries to govern people's actions or lives) and by extension the state, and a positive love and hope for the possibilities that human beings can create when liberated from hierarchy and government.

This is an all-encompassing philosophy, expanding not just to the political and economic, but also to the social and personal, the deeply individual as well as the worldwide. This is why Novatore states that his insurrectionary anarchism, which had in its sights all the vast vistas of human reality, all the stormy horizons of all of society, began with understanding _himself_.

One crucial component of anarchism which lies at a nexus of sorts at the heart of it is the projectual-relational dimension - understanding what interactions, both singular and ongoing, between both individuals and collectivities, would look like when taking place in an essentially anarchic manner. That is, understanding what sort of social existence, and what sort of relationships, we are fighting for - what we, although not committed to morality as a 'higher power,' might still colloquially term 'justice.'

## The Anarchic Encounter and Justice-As-Balance

Crucially, I am no longer interested in producing rules for justice, whether rules of thumb, or mathematical equations, or categorical imperatives, or tables of virtues and vices. That, to me, holds so little interest that I can't even be bothered to produce a systemic critique of it. Instead, I am interested in something different. I am interested in understanding what results "already," naturally, (perhaps as another _way_, or am I just seeing things?) from what is already quintessentially anarchist: what Wilbur terms the _anarchic encounter_, a meeting of two or more equals, Unique ones who accept neither master nor higher power nor sacred idea, on a playing field shaped by all manner of history and circumstance, but no hierarchies, no governments, no authority, no state. I think that the status of this encounter, as the embodiment of the three fundamental ideals of anarchism that I opened this essay with, is crucial, because it represents exactly the sort of interaction anarchists want, and thus has a sort of direct equivalence with an anarchistic sense of justice itself.

To elaborate further, if some relationship is not what would result from free absolutes standing on equal footing and bargaining for their own interests, if no one would accept the bargain that is made given a real choice and equal power, if there is a clear winner and a clear loser, then for an anarchist it is probably 'unjust.' This is a bit like Rawls' theory of justice - and it is from this notion that his theory draws the appearance of justification around itself - except for the fact that we anarchists are not assuming from the beginning that society must be planned, and resources distributed, from the top down; nor do we wish to impose the results of our hypothesizing about such agreements produced in states of equality on others, because for us, _actual_ such agreements, and the actual presence or absence of equality, takes precedence. Psychologically impossible sock-puppets for liberal opinion should not rule over real people with actual interests.

It is with reasoning substantially similar to this that Proudhon dismisses the social contract theory of property: had conditions of equality and universal consent really been present when such a contract was formed, the result, too, would have had to be equality:

> But I wish that this consent, of which so much is made, had been given, either tacitly or formally. What would have been the result? Evidently, the surrenders would have been reciprocal; no right would have been abandoned without the receipt of an equivalent in exchange. We thus come back to equality again, — the sine qua non of appropriation; so that, after having justified property by universal consent, that is, by equality, we are obliged to justify the inequality of conditions by property. Never shall we extricate ourselves from this dilemma. Indeed, if, in the terms of the social compact, property has equality for its condition, at the moment when equality ceases to exist, the compact is broken and all property becomes usurpation. We gain nothing, then, by this pretended consent of mankind. - Proudhon, [_What Is Property?_ Chapter II.2](https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/proudhon/property/ch03.htm)

To return to the subject of the anarchic encounter, now that I've outlined what exactly makes it so important, let me have Wilbur speak for me here:

> \[bold is mine\] Proudhon boiled the whole of anarchism’s “social system” down to equality, collective power, and the principle of justice. On one level, then, under anarchism we simply see a particular sort of encounter acted out, over and over again: equal individuals meet, find the means to balance their individual interests, and from their association arises something else—a collective something with the potential to emerge as another individual, with interests of its own, which must then figure in **the balancing of interests that is justice**... Any number of encounters may take place, involving any number of individuals, on any number of scales and creating any number of associations, but the basic elements remain the same. **The social field of play remains level, the status of the individuals—whether self-conscious free absolutes or various sorts of collectivities—remains equal** before whatever norms and conventions we adopt, and **those norms and conventions always remain subject to critique on the basis of their relationship to the most general, practical sort of equality and justice-balance.** - Shawn P. Wilbur, ["Summary Notions"](https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/contrun/summary-notions/)

To understand why justice-as-balance is so crucial and why, importantly, it is not so much a normative principle as an epiphenomena that results from the interaction of Uniques, let me quote from a different essay of Wilbur's:

> [bold mine] We begin with these free absolutes, these uniques. According to the first, Proudhonian designation, we are dealing with individuals, groups [in Proudhon's social science, even individual persons are regarded as groups] organized according to an unfolding law of development, but with a consciousness of their nature and a capacity for self-reflection. **They may, on the one hand, be inclined to absolutism, to taking their internal law for the law of the world, but they are also capable of recognizing another like themselves, and understanding that in a world of absolutes either some must be masters of others, or there must be balance**. With no criterion of certainty for their observations or judgments, beyond the apparently similarity—in this absolutist dimension—of these otherwise unique beings, **with incommensurable experiences and unknowable essences, they find themselves with equality, Proudhon suggests, as the only basis on which to proceed from individual isolation to society**. - Shawn P. Wilbur, ["The Anatomy of the Encounter"](https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/contrun/the-anatomy-of-the-encounter/)

In other words: when someone who refuses to bow to anyone or any thing, not even an abstract idea of justice (perhaps derived from, e.g., natural law) is faced with another such 
indomitable will, they have one choice: to duke it out, face each other down, and see who will ultimately be the more powerful and who will be forced to submit to the other, or to compromise. And of course, any compromise between real equals is almost always going to be a 50-50 compromise - balance - in some crucial way, although perhaps not in the same way each time or in an obvious dimension. Thus justice-as-balance emerges as the _resultant indicator_ of conditions of anarchy, and gains its value not by being enforced from above, but by being the litmus test for that which we already value: a world where, in Novatore's words, the rabble have ceased to be rabble, and sprung forth in all their flowering potentiality.

In other words, true justice, in the anarchist sense, is not the application of a rigid set of rules for how relations should be organized, but the resolution of conflicts in a way that treats everyone's interests as equal, arrived at through direct reconciliation between the people in conflict by reasoning together. And this is not an categorical imperative, but a flowering forth of that which I already value, and it does not specify outcomes, but circumstances.

Another way of looking at this is through Stirner's lens instead of Proudhon's. While the foregoing discussion has focused on balance because at least some of the interests at play in the anarchic encounter are assumed to be at odds, that is not necessarily the case. Or, at least, it isn't something we have to focus on to the exclusion of all other kinds of association. When egoists meet and associate, it is of necessity something which must be of benefit to both. The nature of their fluid commitment to only their interests (their [feelings and needs](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/anna-ronan-anarchism-as-a-spiritual-practice)) ensures that when that association fails to be of utility to any one involved, it will dissolve:

> Our relationship is one of mutuality and reciprocity. We both gain what we desire from our union, and thus are satisfied. We consume, but are also consumed... When we no longer find such an association as beneficial to ourselves we withdraw and end the union. The union only exists at the behest of our own individual power. If we find that we are working towards another’s ends, no longer enjoying oneself, or desiring a new activity—we withdraw—ending our association. - Castanea Dentata, ["The Union of Egoists"](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/castanea-dentata-the-union-of-egoists)

Thus, the nature of such a union is that it must be of mutual - in some sense equal - benefit.

One final note on justice-as-balance is necessary. Whether someone's interests are equally represented and equally cared about, or one interest is subordinated to another and must supplicate it on terms the dominating interest dictates, must be assessed holistically: if we look at anything but the full picture of a relation, things can get confused. How can, for instance, we "balance the interests" of a man who wants to murder someone and the person he wants to murder? You can't half-murder someone, so what are we supposed to do, let the other man beat him up just half as much as would be necessary to kill him? Cut his throat halfway and then take him to the hospital? Not at all. The answer to this question is to repeal the hidden fallacy and widen our scope: if one man gets his way, their interests are equally represented - both go their own ways alive and whole, living their lives as before, assuming there is no prior hierarchy to speak of - while, if the other gets his way, one will have all his interests obliterated without any consideration whatsoever, and one will get everything he wants and go about his day. Thus, the balancing of the interests of both people is actually the denial of the interests of the would-be murderer, because to do otherwise is itself a clear instance of hierarchy, the subordination of one man's interests to the other's, and thus balance is found in destroying this hierarchy, and only then can the anarchic encounter emerge.

This is how I tread the fine line between egoism, with its concomitant moral nihilism, and speaking about things like 'justice.' As an egoist I am more than free to have interests regarding things other than myself. In fact, egoism begins to blur the boundaries of the individual just as much as it acknowledges the reality of subjectivity - is my desire to live with people who reject hierarchy, authority, and power, both material and intellectual, spiritual and secular, a self-regarding desire, or not? It's not always completely clear, but the key point is that no fixed concept of self-interest motivates the egoistic individual, just an attentiveness to their own feelings and needs as they spring out of their creative nothing. These can be other-regarding, born out of love and appreciation for others or for aesthetic values, or self-regarding, and they are equal as long as they are your Own, your property:

> I am not unselfish so long as the end remains my own, and I, instead of giving myself up to be the blind means of its fulfillment, leave it always an open question. My zeal need not on that account be slacker than the most fanatical, but at the same time I remain toward it frostily cold, unbelieving, and its most irreconcilable enemy; I remain its judge, because I am its owner. - Stirner, [_The Ego and Its Own_](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dr-bones-the-stirner-wasn-t-a-capitalist-you-fucking-idiot-cheat-sheet#toc9)

So, as part of my will to power, I seek to push forward anarchism, as the _sine qua non_ (to imitate the master) of the society I wish to live in, and, as part of that, I view justice-as-balance as a thing that is pleasing to me.

## Justice and Rationality

In conditions of equality, where two Uniques or free absolutes who will not yield to each other meet and decided to cooperate or compromise, to find some mutually beneficial arrangement to either further their common interests or balance their opposing ones, what are the means by which they find such a mutually beneficial balance?

One tool might be, as the previous quotes from Wilbur hinted at, the application of norms, conventions, rules, or traditions - knowledge about what worked on previous, sufficiently similar, occasions, and common understandings of what manifestations of equality matter to those meeting, or what equality even really means. But ultimately, if we're going to be talking about a seriously _anarchic_ encounter, where no one is governed by anything and no one submits to any authority but their own, those things are at best tools - they have to remain _your own_, the property of the individuals in their encounter; the encounter and the individuals in it cannot become the property of these traditions. To quote again:

> Norms, conventions, rules, laws, rights—no matter what language we use to talk about the more persistent aspects of our mutual self-government, the things that that language represents can never assume any authority in and of themselves... Arguably, that means much more than to say that they must not be backed by state or police powers, violence or the threat of violence. If we accept Proudhon’s summary, it is really a question of preserving in each encounter a sort of positive lawlessness, and, in part, we may do this by acknowledging that each encounter is a new encounter, that there is no ready-made system for projecting ourselves into the future, even just a moment at a time... We pile up knowledge and experience in all of those moments, but nothing is certain... any anarchism worthy of the name is going to be pretty relentlessly suspect of anything that looks like permission or prohibition—both practices which demand some position of authority from which to regulate our encounters in some a priori manner. - Shawn P. Wilbur, ["Summary Notions"](https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/contrun/summary-notions/)

Thus, what ultimately determines the outcome of such an attempt at balance, compromise, or mutuality will be the dialogue that must necessarily emerge from the communication between parties to the encounter in question: an ongoing process of offering reasons, perspectives, experiences, justifications, desires, interests, and, in effect, going through dialectical process of bargaining which is far more complex and in depth than the bargaining of game theory but still, ultimately, guided by similar forces. This process of engaging in dialogue is necessary because, by the nature of the anarchic encounter, the free absolutes who meet in it need to come to a common understanding, which needs to be achieved through language and the presentation of 'reasons' - although traditional analytic Rationality need not be exactly present. This is especially since such free absolutes have no unquestioned, authoritative template to automatically assume for satisfying such conditions, and any traditions they might appeal to must be _selected_, which requires use of reasoning and discourse "above" or prior to any use of tradition - and it really must be a _use_.

It is through this process of reasoning together, coming to a shared understanding and common ground, or at the very least accepting the incommensurability and equal 'legitimateness' of other perspectives, that the hopeful, creative nature of the anarchic encounter comes in:

> Let’s underline again this notion of a society without permission or prohibition, and emphasize that all of our anarchic encounters will require something more of us than just asserting our “rights” or fulfilling our “duties” with regard to one another. Every act of association will involve an act of creation, specifically the creation of some bit of some possible world, and creative acts involve some sort of erotics as much as economics. There is a lot that needs to be looked at with regard to how all this creative stuff plays out, but let’s start by saying that none of the familiar language for it—society, community, market, etc.—gets us too far. - Shawn P. Wilbur, ["Summary Notions"](https://www.libertarian-labyrinth.org/contrun/summary-notions/)

It is through this notion that a sense of justice as an (in some sense) rational process of discourse with its goal being a balancing along some dimension of equality of the interests of those involved in a common conflict or cause emerges from a purely egoistic notion of not being willing to subordinate oneself to anything, _including_ normative accounts of justice itself. Of course, this concept of justice has very little positive content - it has as many forms and expressions as there are pairings or groupings of people in existence - but it explicitly provides the form for an anarchic sense of interactions. It presents, in essence, a unification of the moral nihilism and according pluralism of Stirner and the rational sense of justice in Proudhon. I have Wilbur largely to thank for this insight, but I want to analyze and elaborate on it myself and draw together various sources.

## Equality and Collectivity

For someone used to thinking in terms of the "greater good" or the "public good" - that is, those poisoned by the mythology of utilitarianism, majoritarian democracy, and liberalism, this focus on treating all of the interests of all of the free absolutes (or Uniques, whichever you prefer) that take part in an anarchic encounter as equal, and focusing on the balance between them, might sound similar to the principle of utility: each individual being equal, shouldn't the greater number of individuals weigh more in a 'just' decision than the lesser?

This is fundamentally confused for a few basic reasons.

First of all, for a free absolute to submit their will, power, and interests to the will of a greater number is still a submission, still an imposition of duty, obligation, or subordination, a creation of a hierarchy in which the collectivity has greater weight than the individual or smaller collectivity. This is merely a reproduction of the exact sort of thing the anarchic encounter rejects, and is contrary to its preconditions and the nature of the Unique one: collectivity holds no normative weight for such a one, and any attempt to subordinate or obliterate their interests in service to something else, whether it has more people or less, remains an attempt to subordinate them which they will shrug off with a laugh and defend themselves from. Why should I be subject to the interests of another, simply because they have more people backing them? I don't want to live in a world like that. I don't want to agree to that.

Second, and crucially, justice-as-balance takes place between interests, not between individuals as such. When balancing between the interests of a collectivity and an individual, there are still only two interests at play: the shared collective interest of the former and the singular, but just as real, interest of the latter. If neither side is required to submit, neither by normative dogma nor by force of arms, then the compromise between them must remain balanced. Equal. Equal consideration, compromise.

Thirdly, collectivities and individuals are different kinds of entities, even if in Proudhon's thought they are similar in some ways. Just like the set {1,1,1,1,1} would not be equivalent to the number 5, a collectivity is a kind of absolute, but it is not a Unique nor a free absolute. When there is a collectivity that has shared interests, the interests of that group do not count for more than the interests of any individual, because, instead of being rolled up into a single (somehow more "valuable") composite individual, treating it like a new entity has come into being instead of what it actually is, which is just a composition of individuals who happen to share a certain interest, each member of that group counts singly against the individual. After all, since each member of the group shares an interest, if that interest is favored over the interest of the other individual, each member of that group has also had their interest dominate at the expense of the other person's.

Note that this is not a projection of what 'would' happen practically speaking, in a sort of 'state of nature' vacuum absent anarchist norms or associations or institutions, should the interests of a group come into conflict with an individual - in such a 'realistic' case, it is all too likely that the individual would end up just being subordinated to the collectivity, but the point is that that kind of subordination is what we are wishing to avoid, by positing the anarchic encounter as the template for interactions between free people, and so the trick is to be able to identify when what we want happens and when it doesn't, and try to build structures that resist this sort of 'state of nature' attack on the individual. Which leads me to the final section of this essay.

## Power and Hierarchy

To bolster my account of the anarchic encounter, I think a few words about the nature of hierarchy (and its associates, authority and subordination) are in order. After all, these are the structural factors which the anarchic encounter is supposed to be free of, and which justice-as-balance is supposed to be the litmus test for.

Like my conception of justice itself, my conception of hierarchy (and henceforth also authority and subordination, which should be read implicitly whenever I mention it from now on) is not one based on a set of rigid rules or relations which are prohibited in the case of hierarchy just as they are prescribed in the case of justice. Hierarchy wears as many faces as there are human faces, as many shapes as there are places and times in the world where people interact. It is one of the most versatile things in existence.

Therefore it is ultimately necessary to fall back on the concept of family resemblance for it, like almost any other concept not artificially constructed specifically to be delimited, because there is no 'essence' to it, no set of necessary and sufficient conditions which describe it. In the end, I can only give examples, because any attempt to come up with a complete account of any ethical concept, such as justice, self-defense, hierarchy, or whatever else you please, is bound to fall afoul of exceptions, which one is either then forced to accept - making that account a sacred idea that you bow down to, over and above your own intuitions, feelings, and needs in the moment regarding specific matters - or which one is forced to accommodate by adding ever more epicycles to the theory until it is basically no guide at all (the way that guides is not the constant way).

Nevertheless I think it is worth taking a stab at it. Not as a complete description, but as a sort of _generalized example_ which can serve as something to build a proper form of family resemblance off of.

Let's begin with a basic concept: **coercion**. Someone is coerced into making a choice when their list of acceptable choices is so restricted as to make the only acceptable choice that one choice, or when that list is severely restricted, anyway. As an analogy, one can say one's choices are less free the less freedom remains to you should you make each one of the choices available to you - just as I am less free in my choice of direction if, proceeding down a tunnel, I come to a fork, where one path continues on (if perhaps narrower), while the other ventures on a little way and then ends in a dead end. Thus, coercion is a spectrum - the list of acceptable choices can vary in length (or they can even have no physical choice at all in extreme cases), the relative acceptability of the choices can change in degree, etc. Additionally, this can be achieved actively, by the person benefiting from the coerced choice, as in the case of making someone do something by putting a gun to their head, or _passively_, by merely taking advantage of someone's already dire circumstances, their lack of alternative options.

To a certain extent, we all exercise coercion, because self-defense does exactly that - it makes people that want to hurt us not do so using violence or the threat of it. Likewise, we "force" people to deal with us fairly, instead of dominating us or being tyrannical over us, through the threat of using violence if they don't deal with us fairly. But this is merely the absolutism of the free absolute, the unique, which defends its own. It is in fact, in a sense, the precondition for the anarchic encounter at all!

The crucial difference between these kinds of everyday unobjectionable uses of coercion and coercion exercised on behalf of capitalism, the state, and other kinds of tyranny and hierarchy is that in the one case, it's aggressive interference - marching into our lives and telling us what to do and not to do when otherwise we would've had nothing to do with them, or taking control of the things we use to maintain our lives - while in the more common case it's a reaction, it's defensive - we are controlling their lives in a sense, but only to get them to stop dominating and controlling ours. I don't want to become my landlord's landlord, I just want to get him to stop being my landlord, etc.

Whether someone is controlling others only to not themselves be controlled, or controlling others for the purpose merely of controlling them is a detailed, case by case thing, an area that I leave up to judgment, although I don't think it's very often a difficult thing to determine - just ask whose life is effected more by the use of coercion. If what you want to control effects my life more than yours, then you are trying to control me - if your life more than mine, you are more interested in controlling yourself. Thus for instance if someone is trying to outlaw public displays of affection on the part of queer people because they don't want to see it, they are trying to control queer people, because that effects queer people's lives far more than their own (not having to see something you can easily ignore, versus not being able to express affection toward a loved one).

The key here, ultimately, seems to be whether something is _invasive_ or not, just as Tucker says in his writings - but that itself seems to boil down to equality of a sort, so, the key to justice remains equality, as Proudhon thought.

The next concept is **power**: the ability to use coercion to get advantage over someone else. Power lets you set the terms of a bargain unilaterally, or nearly so, to extract more out of the relationship than the other parties to a relationship get, makes one party more beholden to the interests of the other than the other is, and so on. Power is usually only possible when coercion is forcing people to interact with the person who wants power, so they can't simply reject a relation which is inequitable.

Examples are, for instance, bosses who have to care very little about the happiness of the employees under them, can ignore employee input, etc, while the employees have to worry a lot about displeasing their boss all the time, because they might lose their job, which is a seriously bad option much of the time. Another example is the classic example of capitalist profit: since capitalists own the means of production and people need to eat, they have extremely unequal bargaining power and so can get much more out of the deal than others.

Again the key seems to be equality - power is the ability to get something over on the other person.

And, finally, we arrive at **hierarchy**: hierarchy is sort of like the reification and perpetuation of power and coercion - when you have varying levels of power between various distinct nodes in a system, all generally running in one direction, where these lines of power are institutionalized, legitimized, organized, and generally turned into a system of some kind. Capitalism, patriarchy, the state, these are all themselves hierarchies, because they are ongoing, elaborated forms of coercive invasion and power.

## Power and Justice

Out of this picture of justice-as-balance and the continual, crossing and crisscrossing, ongoing, distributed, interaction between free absolutes who meet and are unwilling to bow and are therefore forced to compromise and engage in dialogue with each other, emerges a picture of the social world in which each person asserts their will to power - their innate desire to express themselves both in their person through self-determination and self-actualization and through impressing their personality and interests on the world around them -, expanding the horizon of their _property_ as far is it will go, until that horizon meets with the horizons of others and they stop at the limits of others' will to power, bleeding into each other and finding a balance between them.

I think this is the nexus where many conceptions of anarchy meet: the eternal social war that Novatore spoke about, where each person is the judge of what they possess; the jovial, sociable, unscrupulous egoism of Stirner's union; Proudhon's justice-as-balance and rationality in dialogue between equals; the aristocratic value of might that Nietzsche brings to the table; and finally everyone's right to "beautiful, radiant things" that Goldman so desires. 
We can create a social world in which the anarchic encounter is made possible, and in turn gives birth to a social reality in which all of these things turn out to mean the same thing in the end, by decentralizing power as far as possible and balancing force and interests through giving each person the power to shape their future both in cooperation and contradistinction to others.

This is the ongoing project of anarchism itself.

Our goal is to take part in creating a world where the structures and norms that we take part in and perpetuate are _actually_ in the interest of each of us, because if they are not we reject and resist them; where we have a conception of liberty that means that we are genuinely motivated, through our own interests, to respect the boundaries of the liberty of the other, because in return we get a substantial, rich, and meaningful respect from them for our own liberty under the same conception - instead of, for instance, making liberty equivalent to property, so that some gain by this liberty and some sacrifice for it.

The task of anarchism, in other words, is to imagine - not plan, though, because anarchy must necessarily be pluralistic - a society that creates harmony between people by eliminating the tools and incentives for both oppression and submission. We want to do this because, as Tucker says in ["Relation of the State to the Individual"](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/benjamin-tucker-instead-of-a-book#toc5):

> If this, then, were a question of right, it would be, according to the Anarchists, purely a question of strength. But, fortunately, it is not a question of right: it is a question of expediency, of knowledge, of science,—the science of living together, the science of society. [A question of what sort of society I would like to live in.] The history of humanity has been largely one long and gradual discovery of the fact that the individual is the gainer by society exactly in proportion as society is free, and of the law that the condition of a permanent and harmonious society is the greatest amount of individual liberty compatible with equality of liberty.

And we can create such a society by ensuring that the liberty (autonomy) of no individual comes at the cost of the liberty (autonomy) of any other, so that no one is forced to bow down to any one else in service of their interests at the cost of their own, but any compromise we make with the interests of others brings equal (or equitable) benefit to ourselves.

I think the meaning of constructing the idea that respecting the liberty of others should lead to a truly equal respect for one's own liberty is best demonstrated by examining its negative image: the "reciprocal" relationship of, say, a feudal lord and his serf, or a capitalist and a wage slave. The respect of the lesser party in each of _those_ bargains for the liberties and interests of the capitalist or the lord directly produce the lesser party's servitude and debased condition. "You respect my property and I'll respect your person insofar as I won't kill you or (completely) enslave you, but allow you to sit there and starve." It is through our collective respect of the property and rights (privileges) of our oppressors that they force us to eat scraps from under their table. They own our places of work, our places of play, our homes, and rule over us night and day, leeching off our labor like vampires, and we give them all this for so much less in return. They gain liberty, the liberty to dispose of all this privilege and power, all this wealth and material splendor, at cost to us: our autonomy, our freedom, our very humanity. Yes, they might give us some scraps of respect in return, maybe they promise not to murder us (outright) or give us some wages (a pittance), but the appearance of reciprocity is just that - an appearance, and it is our sacrifice by respecting their liberties that directly leads to our oppression. To quote [Stirner](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/dr-bones-the-stirner-wasn-t-a-capitalist-you-fucking-idiot-cheat-sheet):

> By what then is your property secure, you creatures of preferment? — and give themselves the answer, By our refraining from interference! And so by our protection! And what do you give us for it? Kicks and disdain you give to the “common people”; police supervision, and a catechism with the chief sentence “Respect what is not yours, what belongs to others! respect others, and especially your superiors!” But we reply, “If you want our respect, buy it for a price agreeable to us. We will leave you your property, if you give a due equivalent for this leaving.”

> Really, what equivalent does the general in time of peace give for the many thousands of his yearly income.? — another for the sheer hundred-thousands and millions yearly? What equivalent do you give for our chewing potatoes and looking calmly on while you swallow oysters? Only buy the oysters of us as dear as we have to buy the potatoes of you, then you may go on eating them.Or do you suppose the oysters do not belong to us as much as to you? You will make an outcry over violence if we reach out our hands and help consume them, and you are right. Without violence we do not get them, as you no less have them by doing violence to us.

Anarchists reject this entirely, preferring norms that genuinely benefit all parties, and encouraging people to reject all norms and relationships which do not benefit you as well as the other parties. This sense of justice as balance can thus be taken as a guide and extended to every relation, rule, or collectivity: if it ceases to be of use to you, don't respect it any more. If it benefits you, by all means protect it, participate in it, defend it, enjoy it! Mutual aid, solidarity, norms of respecting individual possessions or commons, whatever it is, but as soon as it stops serving you, what more interest in it do you have? The capitalists' claims to property oppress you? Break their stuff, or steal it, or sell it. The law oppresses you? What is the law to you, really? Fuck it. Nothing can command you. If a person or system does not respect your interests and your equality to it, then do not respect it in turn, because it has not earned that respect. Participate in what benefits you and avoid what does not. A widespread elaboration of this attitude is precisely the insurrectionary, criminal anarchism that I support, which would lead, through a world of anarchic encounters, to norms and institutions that, of necessity, benefit everyone. A constant, ongoing battle against those who would exploit us or dominate us, that is anarchism.