---
published: true
title: The Character of an Egoist
tags: ["egoism", "ethics"]
---
## 1

Probably one of the most instantaneous assumptions that someone might make, after reading about [my views](https://blog.alexisdumas.org/2021/12/08/egoism.html), as a moral subjectivist and an egoist, not to mention a Nietzschiean, is that I am someone who holds to no principles, has no character, and simply does whatever I feel might benefit myself in the moment. To a certain degree I have already dealt with why that isn't true in my first essay on the subject, since I pointed out there that a willing egoist, someone who knows and accepts that they are an egoist, is just someone who is conscious about the fact that the only motivation they have for doing anything is desire, and is no longer willing to accept phantom concepts that appropriate a part of their desires for use as a carrot or a stick to get them to fulfill duties and obligations that are primarily for the benefit, and the power, of others. It does not imply that one must only have self-reflecting desires, or that one must be a sadist or a psychopath whatsoever. Nevertheless, I think it would be helpful to explore in more depth why egoism, as I explain it, does not entail someone who is "evil" or without principles.

## 2

The first point is that, obviously, if the desires that we act on are not required to be entirely self-regarding, then human beings, being social creatures, will naturally form desires concerning the well-being of the people around them. Egoism does not rule out natural trust and good feelings among people and communities, and extensive psychological and anthropological shows that when such feelings are not hindered, they naturally grow. Human beings are not inherently benevolent or malevolent, we are a complex mixture and intermingling of both, and what generally causes malevolent action is not the love for causing harm or the total lack of regard for others that is typically portrayed. Instead, it is when our natural social natures are suppressed by forming in-groups and out-groups, or dehumanizing people, or when we are forced by circumstances that are already alienating and degrading, that we tend to take anti-social actions. These can all be mitigated, both by socio-economic changes, but also by philosophy. As soon as the truth is ascertained and arbitrary distinctions built on tradition and phantoms but nothing more are cast aside, people typically feel a sense of comradeship for all other thinking and feeling human beings. This is both because we have a natural ability to feel empathy and compassion for other humans, and because if everyone around you is doing better, then that will benefit you as well.

Thus, even if egoism does not *guarantee* that someone will be benevolent, it certainly does not preclude it. Max Stirner himself said:

> "I love men, too, not merely individuals, but every one. But I love them with the consciousness of my egoism; I love them because love makes me happy, I love because loving is natural to me, it pleases me. I know no 'commandment of love.'"

Indeed, egoism does not even ask that those who are benevolent towards their fellow human beings tolerate those who are not. Moral subjectivism is not the same as moral relativism. Egoism simply asks that all act according to their heart's desires, trying to see and think as clearly as possible. If you stand against something, and someone is doing that thing, *you may try to stop it*, and others may try to stop you. So if you stand for liberty, equality, and justice (the balance of interests among equals), as I do, then if you see someone violating that, you do not need to wait for a blessing from on high or an objective argument to go out and stop that violation from happening.

Additionally, most people have beliefs about what kinds of societies it would be nice to live in, what is fair, and so on, and those need not be self-serving in an obvious way, especially since when considering a vision of society it is much more likely that your position in it will be random, or on the lower end of average, than that you will be in a position of power, so when advocating for a society it is best to advocate for one from behind a "veil of ignorance." I for one would much rather live in an egalitarian society than a radically unequal one, because I know that not only would I be freer and better off in the sort of society that does not make one's rights or well-being contingent on anything, it is unlikely I would end up in power or be able to maintain it, so it would be better to live in a society where there is a balance of power between everyone.

## 3

There are more reasons that an egoist can have for being benevolent, too. For one thing, an egoist must also live in human society, and in human society, reputation, trust, and reciprocal relationships matter enormously. If it is known that you are an individual who is likely to do, and capable of doing, anything at any given moment, merely because it seems to be to your advantage at the time — stealing, backstabbing, etc — then no one will want to interact with you, and you will likely be shunned by those around you. And those suspicions will grow around you even if nothing can be proven, if things just *happen* to disappear when you're around, for instance. Conversely, actually initiating and positively engaging in reciprocal, mutually beneficial relations with people and your community at large is often a very good way to ensure that those people will be ready and willing to do the same for you when you need it. Positive reputation and social relations are a totally rational investment, as well as something that will probably make you feel happy.

In addition, building habits of acting in ways that are respectful of the interests of others and mutually beneficial for you and them will make acting that way, and resisting harming people (in the vast majority of situations in which doing so is not actually beneficial to you) that much easier. It lowers the cost of a range of actions that are typically more beneficial, useful, and rewarding, and lowers the cost of resisting actions that are more typically self-destructive. Therefore, building positive, pro-social habits is a incredibly rational thing to do, even for someone who is purely self-interested, not to mention a human being who naturally gains joy from the act of helping others and from being around the joy of others. And how do we form such habits? By acting in accordance with them regularly and with conscious intention, even when we don't want to, so they get ingrained in us! Thus, as Aristotle says, the path to forming a good character is by consciously choosing to act in a good way. In this case, "good" here just means "useful for living a social life," but the point remains the same. You shouldn't turn forming these habits, or the habits themselves, into an absolute end-goal or commandment, but nevertheless, taking a somewhat virtue ethical approach to forming positive habits can be very helpful.

## 4

Additionally, one of the things that being a willing egoist does to you is make you more honest. After all, if you accept that the ultimate reason you do anything is because you want to, there is no more hiding behind duty, obligation, tradition, or authority. You must be honest with yourself and others, and others who accept that philosophy will see through any obfuscation you or anyone else attempts to throw up. If you harm someone, they will know, and you will know, that you either harmed them because you *want* to harm them, or because you *don't care* about harming them. No appeal to a greater good or a duty to king and country will excuse you. You are ultimately responsible to yourself and those around you, especially those you harm, and you must answer for what you do.

By mirror image, similarly, when you do something that benefits others, everyone will know that it is because you *wanted* to, not out of some sense of obligation or altruism, and that will reflect better on you. After all, someone who does kind things because they love to do them, because they love other people, because doing kind things is natural and pleasing to them, is intrinsically a person that other people will want to be around more than someone who only does kind things because they feel they must, and groans at every giving.

## 5

None of this is to say that a willing egoist would act just precisely like any other normal person. By  rejecting spooks, and choosing to admit and embrace the fact that we serve our own desires, we free ourselves from the ensnaring web of  culture, society, and authority. Egoists do not recognize any authority above themselves, either ideological, philosophical, or physical. They do not recognize legitimacy as something that some people have and some do not. They may play along with your institutions and your social concepts and means of control, but they do not ingest them and become owned by them.  These spooks that egoists reject the absolute domination of  include  religion, personal responsibility or worth, humanism, morality, civil  society, political participation, to name a few. An egoist may act or believe things that align with these concepts, but these concepts are under the egoist, tools they use or things they adopt and cast aside at will because they  identify with them, not all powerful sacred ideas that hover over their heads. By refusing to serve them unless they serve us, by treating them as rules of thumb at best, and discarding many of them as useless tools of control, egoists end up freer, more ready to achieve their true desires, more direct, and more decisive.

So a willing egoist might feel more dangerous and less predictable than an unwilling egoist, like a wild animal feels more dangerous and less tame than a domesticated one. That is just fine. Egoists are *not* tame animals. But they are just as capable of love, and reciprocity, and all the good and protective and positive aspects of human relations and emotion as anyone else; perhaps moreso, because for them, it is more authentic.