It is a fact too little acknowledged by most people who consider themselves analytical and rational, even though the most critical and thoroughly rational analysis of philosophy always leads to this conclusion --- a conclusion which, even when reached, is rarely spun out to its logical end --- that everyone has a different standpoint, a different set of basic facts to work with.

 As briefly as I can, this is true for two main reasons. Firstly, because there is no objective criteria by which to evaluate perspectives. No normative statement can ultimately be justified without appealing to _felt_ normativity, i.e., to things we already care about, things we already find interesting. The absolutely interesting, the universally interesting, as Stirner says, is the _uninteresting_, because we cannot be reasoned into caring about something we simply don't care about. If this is the case, then it is not just moral statements that become ultimately subjective --- so do the normative strictures of rationality, the so-called intellectual virtues, and everything else Western philosophy holds so dear. These are things that we care about not for some absolute reason, but because we have decided we must care about them. Ask someone why rationality matters so much, and whatever answer they give will not be enough to justify the absolutism with which rationality is celebrated in our philosophical tradition. Therefore, the properties of perspectives that are negatives or positives for one person may be just the reverse for another, or another person might even evaluate perspectives in completely different terms. Secondly, there is no objective standpoint from which to judge perspectives: every perspective you could choose is ultimately just that, a choice one makes, which is contingent on one's own non-rational interests and the subjective "data" one has available as the raw material for shaping one's ideas. Thus, if one chooses to judge another perspective from one's own, there is nothing that says that that is wrong, no objective criteria to deny your personal, perspectival judgment of another perspective's attractiveness or use for you. And some perspectives really will be better at some things than others --- some perspectives are inadequate even for the needs of those who spawned it, unable to actually serve a useful function in explanation, encapsulation, or guidance; some perspectives are incoherent or even contradictory even with the basic things they were built off; some are even nonsensical and so only serve to hide the actual intuitions and reasons the person is really using underneath. This is why convincing people is possible: most of the time, we share at least a _few_ desires that we want our perspectives to satisfy, and at least a few shared experiences of the world, and that common ground can be used to argue on; even if there is no such common ground, showing the incoherence or incapacity of someone's perspective even for their purposes is often possible as well.